I  was  born  in  1910,  in  Paris.  My father was a gentle, easy-going
person, a salad of racial genes:  a  Swiss  citizen,  of  mixed  French  and
Austrian descent, with a dash of the Danube in his veins. I am going to pass
around  in  a  minute some lovely, glossy-blue picture-postcards. He owned a
luxurious hotel on the Riviera. His father and  two  grandfathers  had  sold
wine,  jewels  and silk, respectively. At thirty he married an English girl,
daughter of Jerome Dunn, the  alpinist,  and  granddaughter  of  two  Dorset
parsons,  experts  in  obscure  subjects--paleopedology  and  Aeolian harps,
respectively. My very photogenic mother died in a  freak  accident  (picnic,
lightning) when I was three, and, save for a pocket of warmth in the darkest
past,  nothing  of her subsists within the hollows and dells of memory, over
which, if you can still stand my style (I am writing under observation), the
sun of my infancy had set: surely, you all know those redolent  remnants  of
day  suspended,  with  the  midges,  about  some  hedge in bloom or suddenly
entered and traversed by the rambler, at the bottom of a hill, in the summer
dusk; a furry warmth, golden midges.

My mother's elder sister, Sybil, whom  a  cousin  of  my  father's  had
married  and  then  neglected,  served  in  my immediate family as a kind of
unpaid governess and housekeeper. Somebody told me later that she  had  been
in love with my father, and that he had lightheartedly taken advantage of it
one  rainy  day  and  forgotten  it  by  the time the weather cleared. I was
extremely fond of her, despite the rigidity--the fatal rigidity--of some  of
her  rules.  Perhaps  she  wanted  to make of me, in the fullness of time, a
better widower than my father. Aunt Sybil had pink-rimmed azure eyes  and  a
waxen  complexion.  She  wrote poetry. She was poetically superstitious. She
said she knew she would die soon after my sixteenth birthday, and  did.  Her
husband,  a  great  traveler in perfumes, spent most of his time in America,
where eventually he founded a firm and acquired a bit of real estate.
     I grew, a happy, healthy child in a bright would of illustrated  books,
clean  sand,  orange  trees,  friendly  dogs,  sea vistas and smiling faces.
Around me the splendid Hotel Mirana revolved as a kind of private  universe,
a  whitewashed  cosmos within the blue greater one that blazed outside. From
the aproned pot-scrubber to the flanneled  potentate,  everybody  liked  me,
everybody  petted  me. Elderly American ladies leaning on their canes listed
towards me like towers of Pisa. Ruined Russian princesses who could not  pay
my father, bought me expensive bonbons. He, mon cher petit papa, took
me out boating and biking, taught me to swim and dive and water-ski, read to
me  Don Quixote and Les Miserables, and I adored and respected
him and felt glad for him whenever I  overheard  the  servants  discuss  his
various  lady-friends,  beautiful  and  kind  beings who made much of me and
cooed and shed precious tears over my cheerful motherlessness.

I attended an English day school a few miles from  home,  and  there  I
played  rackets and fives, and got excellent marks, and was on perfect terms
with schoolmates and teachers alike. The only definite sexual events that  I
can  remember  as  having  occurred  before my thirteenth birthday (that is,
before I first saw my little Annabel) were: a solemn,  decorous  and  purely
theoretical  talk  about pubertal surprises in the rose garden of the school
with an American kid, the son of a then  celebrated  motion-picture  actress
whom  he  seldom  saw  in  the three-dimensional world; and some interesting
reactions on the part of my  organism  to  certain  photographs,  pearl  and
umbra,  with  infinitely  soft  partings, in Pichon's sumptuous La Beautи
Humaine that that I had filched from under a  mountain  of  marble-bound
Graphics  in  the  hotel  library.  Later, in his delightful debonair
manner, my father gave me all the information he thought I needed about sex;
this was just before sending me, in the autumn of 1923, to a lycиe in
Lyon (where we were to spend three winters); but alas, in the summer of that
year, he was touring Italy with Mme de R. and her daughter, and I had nobody
to complain to, nobody to consult.

Divorce  proceedings  delayed  my  voyage, and the gloom of yet another
World War had settled upon the globe when,  after  a  winter  of  ennui  and
pneumonia  in  Portugal, I at last reached the States. In New York I eagerly
accepted the soft job fate offered me: it consisted mainly  of  thinking  up
and   editing   perfume   ads.   I  welcomed  its  desultory  character  and
pseudoliterary aspects, attending to it whenever I had nothing better to do.
On the other hand, I was urged by a  war-time  university  in  New  York  to
complete  my  comparative  history of French literature for English-speaking
students. The first volume took me a couple of years during which I  put  in
seldom  less than fifteen hours of work daily. As I look back on those days,
I see them divided tidily into ample  light  and  narrow  shade:  the  light
pertaining  to the solace of research in palatial libraries, the shade to my
excruciating desires and insomnias of which enough has been said. Knowing me
by now, the reader can easily imagine how dusty and hot  I  got,  trying  to
catch  a  glimpse of nymphets (alas, always remote) playing in Central Park,
and how repulsed I was by the glitter of deodorized career girls that a  gay
dog  in  one  of the offices kept unloading upon me. Let us skip all that. A
dreadful breakdown sent me to a sanatorium for more than a year; I went back
to my work--only to be hospitalized again.

Robust outdoor life seemed  to  promise  me  some  relief.  One  of  my
favorite  doctors,  a charming cynical chap with a little brown beard, had a
brother, and this brother was  about  to  lead  an  expedition  into  arctic
Canada.  I was attached to it as a "recorder of psychic reactions." With two
young botanists and an old carpenter I  shared  now  and  then  (never  very
successfully)   the  favors  of  one  of  our  nutritionists,  a  Dr.  Anita
Johnson--who was soon flown back, I am glad to say. I had little  notion  of
what   object  the  expedition  was  pursuing.  Judging  by  the  number  of
meteorologists upon it, we may have been tracking to its lair (somewhere  on
Prince  of  Wales'  Island,  I  understand)  the  wandering and wobbly north
magnetic pole. One group, jointly with the Canadians, established a  weather
station on Pierre Point in Melville Sound. Another group, equally misguided,
collected plankton. A third studied tuberculosis in the tundra. Bert, a film
photographer--an insecure fellow with whom at one time I was made to partake
in   a   good   deal   of   menial   work   (he,   too,   had  some  psychic
troubles)--maintained that the big men on our  team,  the  real  leaders  we
never  saw,  were  mainly  engaged  in  checking  the  influence of climatic
amelioration on the coats of the arctic fox.

We lived in prefabricated timber cabins amid a  Pre-Cambrian  world  of
granite.  We had heaps of supplies--the Reader's Digest, an ice cream
mixer, chemical toilets,  paper  caps  for  Christmas.  My  health  improved
wonderfully  in spite or because of all the fantastic blankness and boredom.
Surrounded  by  such  dejected  vegetation  as  willow  scrub  and  lichens;
permeated, and, I suppose, cleansed by a whistling gale; seated on a boulder
under  a  completely  translucent  sky  (through  which, however, nothing of
importance showed), I felt curiously aloof from my own self. No  temptations
maddened  me.  The  plump, glossy little Eskimo girls with their fish smell,
hideous raven hair and guinea pig faces, evoked even less desire in me  than
Dr. Johnson had. Nymphets do not occur in polar regions.

I  left  my betters the task of analyzing glacial drifts, drumlins, and
gremlins, and kremlins, and for a time tried  to  jot  down  what  I  fondly
thought  were  "reactions"  (I  noticed, for instance, that dreams under the
midnight  sun  tended  to  be  highly  colored,  and  this  my  friend   the
photographer  confirmed).  I was also supposed to quiz my various companions
on a number of  important  matters,  such  as  nostalgia,  fear  of  unknown
animals,  food-fantasies,  nocturnal  emissions,  hobbies,  choice  of radio
programs, changes in outlook and so forth. Everybody got so fed up with this
that I soon dropped the project completely, and only toward the  end  of  my
twenty  months  of  cold  labor  (as  one  of the botanists jocosely put it)
concocted a perfectly spurious and very racy report  that  the  reader  will
find  published in he Annals of Adult Psychophysics for 1945 or 1946,
as well as in the  issue  of  Arctic  Explorations  devoted  to  that
particular  expedition;  which, in conclusion, was not really concerned with
Victoria Island copper or anything like that, as I  learned  later  from  my
genial  doctor;  for  the  nature  of  its  real  purpose was what is termed
"hush-hush," and so let me add merely that whatever it was, that purpose was
admirably achieved.

The  reader  will  regret  to  learn  that  soon  after  my  return  to
civilization I had another bout with insanity (if to melancholia and a sense
of  insufferable  oppression  that  cruel  term  must  be applied). I owe my
complete restoration to a discovery I  made  while  being  treated  at  that
particular  very  expensive  sanatorium.  I  discovered there was an endless
source of robust enjoyment in trifling with psychiatrists: cunningly leading
them on; never letting them see that you know all the tricks of  the  trade;
inventing  for  them  elaborate  dreams,  pure classics in style (which make
them, the dream-extortionists, dream and wake up shrieking);  teasing
them  with  fake  "primal  scenes";  and  never  allowing them the slightest
glimpse of one's real sexual predicament. By bribing a nurse I won access to
some  files  and  discovered,  with  glee,  cards  calling  me  "potentially
homosexual"  and  "totally  impotent."  The  sport  was  so  excellent,  its
results--in my case--so ruddy that I stayed  on  for  a  whole  month
after  I  was  quite well (sleeping admirably and eating like a schoolgirl).
And then I added another week just for the pleasure of taking on a  powerful
newcomer, a displaced (and, surely, deranged) celebrity, known for his knack
of making patients believe they had witnessed their own conception.

Upon  signing  out,  I  cast  around  for some place in the New England
countryside or sleepy small town (elms, white church) where I could spend  a
studious  summer  subsisting  on a compact boxful of notes I had accumulated
and bathing in some nearby lake. My work had begun to interest  me  again--I
mean  my scholarly exertions; the other thing, my active participation in my
uncle's posthumous perfumes, had by then been cut down to a minimum.

One of his former employees,  the  scion  of  a  distinguished  family,
suggested I spend a few months in the residence of his impoverished cousins,
a  Mr.  McCoo,  retired,  and  his wife, who wanted to let their upper story
where a late aunt  had  delicately  dwelt.  He  said  they  had  two  little
daughters,  one  a baby, the other a girl of twelve, and a beautiful garden,
not far from a beautiful lake, and I said it sounded perfectly perfect.

I  exchanged  letters  with  these  people,  satisfying  them   I   was
housebroken,  and  spent  a  fantastic  night on the train, imagining in all
possible detail the enigmatic nymphet I would coach in French and fondle  in
Humbertish.  Nobody  met  me at the toy station where I alighted with my new
expensive bag, and nobody answered the  telephone;  eventually,  however,  a
distraught   McCoo   in   wet  clothes  turned  up  at  the  only  hotel  of
green-and-pink Ramsdale with  the  news  that  his  house  had  just  burned
down--possibly,  owing to the synchronous conflagration that had been raging
all night in my veins. His family, he said, had fled to a farm he owned, and
had taken the car, but a friend of his wife's, a grand person, Mrs. Haze  of
342  Lawn  Street, offered to accommodate me. A lady who lived opposite Mrs.
Haze's  had  lent  McCoo  her  limousine,   a   marvelously   old-fashioned,
square-topped affair, manned by a cheerful Negro. Now, since the only reason
for  my  coming  at  all  had  vanished,  the  aforesaid  arrangement seemed
preposterous. All right, his house would have to be completely  rebuilt,  so
what?  Had  he  not  insured  it sufficiently? I was angry, disappointed and
bored, but being a polite European, could not refuse to be sent off to  Lawn
Street  in  that  funeral  car, feeling that otherwise McCoo would devise an
even more elaborate means of getting rid of me. I saw him scamper away,  and
my chauffeur shook his head with a soft chuckle. En route, I swore to myself
I  would  not  dream of staying in Ramsdale under any circumstance but would
fly  that  very  day  to  the  Bermudas  or  the  Bahamas  or  the   Blazes.
Possibilities of sweetness on technicolor beaches had been trickling through
my  spine  for  some  time  before, and McCoo's cousin had, in fact, sharply
diverted that train of thought with his well-meaning but  as  it  transpired
now absolutely inane suggestion.

Speaking  of  sharp turns: we almost ran over a meddlesome suburban dog
(one of those who like in wait for cars) as we swerved into Lawn  Street.  A
little  further,  the  Haze  house,  a white-frame horror, appeared, looking
dingy and old, more gray than white--the kind of place you know will have  a
rubber  tube  affixable  to  the  tub faucet in lieu of shower. I tipped the
chauffeur and hoped he would immediately drive away so that I  might  double
back  unnoticed to my hotel and bag; but the man merely crossed to the other
side of the street where an old lady was calling to him from her porch. What
could I do? I pressed the bell button.

A colored maid let me in--and left me standing on  the  mat  while  she
rushed  back  to  the  kitchen where something was burning that ought not to
burn.

The front hall  was  graced  with  door  chimes,  a  white-eyed  wooden
thingamabob of commercial Mexican origin, and that banal darling of the arty
middle  class,  van Gogh's "Arlиsienne." A door ajar to the right afforded a
glimpse of a living room, with some more Mexican trash in a  corner  cabinet
and  a  striped sofa along the wall. There was a staircase at the end of the
hallway, and as I stood mopping my brow (only now did I realize how  hot  it
had  been  out-of-doors)  and staring, to stare at something, at an old gray
tennis ball that lay on an oak chest, there came from the upper landing  the
contralto  voice  of  Mrs.  Haze,  who  leaning  over the banisters inquired
melodiously, "Is that Monsieur Humbert?" A bit of cigarette ash dropped from
there in addition. Presently,  the  lady  herself--sandals,  maroon  slacks,
yellow  silk  blouse, squarish face, in that order--came down the steps, her
index finger still tapping upon her cigarette.

I think I had better describe her right away, to get it over with.  The
poor  lady  was  in  her  middle thirties, she had a shiny forehead, plucked
eyebrows and quite simple but not unattractive features of a type  that  may
be  defined as a weak solution of Marlene Dietrich. Patting her bronze-brown
bun, she led me into the parlor and we talked for a minute about  the  McCoo
fire  and  the  privilege of living in Ramsdale. Her very wide-set sea-green
eyes had a funny way of traveling all over you, carefully avoiding your  own
eyes.  Her  smile  was  but  a  quizzical jerk of one eyebrow; and uncoiling
herself from the sofa as she talked, she kept  making  spasmodic  dashes  at
three  ashtrays  and the near fender (where lay the brown core of an apple);
whereupon she would sink back again, one leg  folded  under  her.  She  was,
obviously,  one  of those women whose polished words may reflect a book club
or bridge club, or any other deadly conventionality,  but  never  her  soul;
women who are completely devoid of humor; women utterly indifferent at heart
to  the  dozen  or  so  possible subjects of a parlor conversation, but very
particular  about  the  rules  of  such  conversations,  through  the  sunny
cellophane  of  which  not  very  appetizing  frustrations  can  be  readily
distinguished. I was perfectly aware that if by any wild chance I became her
lodger, she would methodically proceed to do in regard to me what  taking  a
lodger probably meant to her all along, and I would again be enmeshed in one
of those tedious affairs I knew so well.

But there was no question of my settling there. I could not be happy in
that type  of  household with bedraggled magazines on every chair and a kind
of horrible hybridization between the comedy of so-called "functional modern
furniture" and the tragedy of decrepit rockers and rickety lamp tables  with
dead lamps. I was led upstairs, and to the left--into "my" room. I inspected
it  through  the  mist  of my utter rejection of it; but I did discern above
"my" bed Renи Prinet's "Kreutzer Sonata." And she called that servant maid's
room a "semi-studio"! Let's get out of here at once, I firmly said to myself
as I pretended to deliberate over the absurdly,  and  ominously,  low  price
that my wistful hostess was asking for board and bed.

By this time I was in a state of excitement bordering on insanity;  but
I  also had the cunning of the insane. Sitting there, on the sofa, I managed
to attune, by a  series  of  stealthy  movements,  my  masked  lust  to  her
guileless  limbs.  It  was  no  easy  matter  to  divert the little maiden's
attention while I  performed  the  obscure  adjustments  necessary  for  the
success  of  the trick. Talking fast, lagging behind my own breath, catching
up with it, mimicking a  sudden  toothache  to  explain  the  breaks  in  my
patter--and  all the while keeping a maniac's inner eye on my distant golden
goal, I cautiously increased the magic friction that was doing away,  in  an
illusional,  if  not  factual,  sense,  with the physically irremovable, but
psychologically very friable texture of the  material  divide  (pajamas  and
robe)  between  the weight of two sunburnt legs, resting athwart my lap, and
the hidden tumor of an unspeakable passion. Having,  in  the  course  of  my
patter,  hit  upon  something  nicely  mechanical,  I recited, garbling them
slightly, the words of a foolish song that was then popular--O my Carmen, my
little Carmen, something, something, those something nights, and the  stars,
and  the cars, and the bars, and the barmen; I kept repeating this automatic
stuff and holding  her  under  its  special  spell  (spell  because  of  the
garbling),  and  all  the  while  I was mortally afraid that some act of God
might interrupt me, might remove the golden load in the sensation  of  which
all  my  being  seemed concentrated, and this anxiety forced me to work, for
the first minute or so, more hastily than was consensual  with  deliberately
modulated enjoyment. The stars that sparkled, and the cars that parkled, and
the  bars, and the barmen, were presently taken over by her; her voice stole
and  corrected  the  tune  I  had  been  mutilating.  She  was  musical  and
apple-sweet.  Her  legs  twitched a little as they lay across my live lap; I
stroked them; there she lolled in the  right-hand  corner,  almost  asprawl,
Lola  the  bobby-soxer,  devouring her immemorial fruit, singing through its
juice, losing her slipper, rubbing the heel of her slipperless foot  in  its
sloppy  anklet,  against  the pile of old magazines heaped on my left on the
sofa--and every movement she made, every shuffle and ripple,  helped  me  to
conceal  and  to improve the secret system of tactile correspondence between
beast and beauty--between my gagged, bursting beast and the  beauty  of  her
dimpled body in its innocent cotton frock.

Under  my  glancing finger tips I felt the minute hairs bristle ever so
slightly along her shins. I lost myself in  the  pungent  but  healthy  heat
which  like summer haze hung about little Haze. Let her stay, let her stay.
 As she strained to chuck the  core  of  her  abolished  apple  into  the
fender,  her  young  weight, her shameless innocent shanks and round bottom,
shifted in my tense, tortured, surreptitiously laboring lap; and  all  of  a
sudden  a  mysterious change came over my senses. I entered a plane of being
where nothing mattered, save the infusion of joy brewed within my body. What
had begun as a delicious distention of my innermost roots became  a  glowing
tingle  which  now  had  reached  that  state  of  absolute security,
confidence and reliance not found elsewhere in conscious life. With the deep
hot sweetness  thus  established  and  well  on  its  way  to  the  ultimate
convulsion,  I  felt  I could slow down in order to prolong the glow. Lolita
had been safely  solipsized.  The  implied  sun  pulsated  in  the  supplied
poplars;  we  were  fantastically  and  divinely alone; I watched her, rosy,
gold-dusted, beyond the veil of my controlled delight, unaware of it,  alien
to  it,  and  the  sun  was  on her lips, and her lips were apparently still
forming the words of the Carmen-barmen  ditty  that  no  longer  reached  my
consciousness.  Everything  was  now  ready. The nerves of pleasure had been
laid bare. The corpuscles of Krause were entering the phase of  frenzy.  The
least  pressure  would suffice to set all paradise loose. I had ceased to be
Humbert the Hound, the sad-eyed degenerate cur clasping the boot that  would
presently  kick  him  away. I was above the tribulations of ridicule, beyond
the possibilities of retribution. In my self-made seraglio, I was a  radiant
and  robust  Turk,  deliberately,  in the full consciousness of his freedom,
postponing the moment of actually enjoying the youngest and frailest of  his
slaves.  Suspended  on  the  brink  of  that  voluptuous  abyss (a nicety of
physiological equipoise comparable to certain techniques in the arts) I kept
repeating the chance words after  her--barmen,  alarmin',  my  charmin',  my
carmen,  ahmen,  ahahamen--as one talking and laughing in his sleep while my
happy hand crept up her sunny leg as far as the shadow of  decency  allowed.
The day before she had collided with the heavy chest in the hall and--"Look,
look!"--I  gasped--"look what you've done, what you've done to yourself, ah,
look"; for there was, I swear,  a  yellowish-violet  bruise  on  her  lovely
nymphet  thigh  which  my huge hairy hand massaged and slowly enveloped--and
because of her very perfunctory underthings, there seemed to be  nothing  to
prevent my muscular thumb from reaching the hot hollow of her groin--just as
you  might  tickle  and  caress  a giggling child--just that--and: "Oh, it's
nothing at all," she cried with a sudden shrill note in her voice,  and  she
wiggled,  and squirmed, and threw her head back, and her teeth rested on her
glistening underlip as she half-turned away, and my moaning mouth, gentlemen
of the jury, almost reached her bare neck, while I crushed out  against  her
left  buttock  the last throb of the longest ecstasy man or monster had ever
known.

Immediately afterward (as if we had been struggling and now my grip had
eased) she rolled off  the  sofa  and  jumped  to  her  feet--to  her  foot,
rather--in  order  to  attend to the formidably loud telephone that may have
been ringing for ages as far  as  I  was  concerned.  There  she  stood  and
blinked,  cheeks  aflame,  hair awry, her eyes passing over me as lightly as
they did over the furniture, and as she listened or spoke (to her mother who
was telling her to come to lunch with her at the Chatfileds--neither Lo  nor
Hum  knew yet what busybody Haze was plotting), she kept tapping the edge of
the table with the slipper she held in her hand. Blessed be  the  Lord,  she
had noticed nothing!

The sun made its usual round of the house as the afternoon ripened into
evening. I had a drink. And another. And  yet  another.  Gin  and  pineapple
juice,  my  favorite  mixture,  always  double  my energy. I decided to busy
myself with our unkempt lawn. Une petite attention.  It  was  crowded
with  dandelions,  and  a  cursed  dog--I  loathe dogs--had defiled the flat
stones where a sundial had once stood. Most of the  dandelions  had  changed
from suns to moons. The gin and Lolita were dancing in me, and I almost fell
over  the  folding  chairs that I attempted to dislodge. Incarnadine zebras!
There are some eructations that sound like cheers--at least,  mine  did.  An
old fence at the back of the garden separated us from the neighbor's garbage
receptacles  and  lilacs; but there was nothing between the front end of our
lawn (where it sloped along one side of the house) and the street. Therefore
I was able to watch (with the smirk of one about to perform a  good  action)
for  the  return  of Charlotte: that tooth should be extracted at once. As I
lurched and lunged with the hand mower, bits of grass  optically  twittering
in  the low sun, I kept an eye on that section of suburban street. It curved
in from under an archway of huge shade trees, then  sped  towards  us  down,
down,  quite  sharply,  past  old  Miss  Opposite's  ivied  brick  house and
high-sloping lawn (much trimmer than ours) and disappeared  behind  our  own
front  porch which I could not see from where I happily belched and labored.
The dandelions perished. A reek of  sap  mingled  with  the  pineapple.  Two
little  girls, Marion and Mabel, whose comings and goings I had mechanically
followed of late (but who could replace my Lolita?) went toward  the  avenue
(from  which  our  Lawn  Street  cascaded), one pushing a bicycle, the other
feeding from a paper bag, both talking at the top  of  their  sunny  voices.
Leslie,  old  Miss  Opposite's  gardener  and  chauffeur, a very amiable and
athletic Negro, grinned at me from afar and shouted,  re-shouted,  commented
by  gesture,  that  I  was  mighty  energetic  today.  The  fool  dog of the
prosperous junk dealer next door ran after a blue car--not Charlotte's.  The
prettier  of  the  two  little  girls  (Mabel, I think), shorts, halter with
little to halt, bright hair--a nymphet, by Pan!--ran back  down  the  street
crumpling  her paper bag and was hidden from this Green Goat by the frontage
of Mr. And Mrs. Humbert's residence. A station wagon popped out of the leafy
shade of the avenue, dragging some of it on  its  roof  before  the  shadows
snapped,   and  swung  by  at  an  idiotic  pace,  the  sweatshirted  driver
roof-holding with his left hand and the  junkman's  dog  tearing  alongside.
There  was  a  smiling  pause--and  then,  with  a  flutter  in my breast, I
witnessed the return of  the  Blue  Sedan.  I  saw  it  glide  downhill  and
disappear  behind  the corner of the house. I had a glimpse of her calm pale
profile. It occurred to me that until she went upstairs she would  not  know
whether  I  had  gone  or  not.  A minute later, with an expression of great
anguish on her face, she looked down at me from the window of Lo's room.  By
sprinting upstairs, I managed to reach that room before she left it.

When  the bride is a window and the groom is a widower; when the former
has lived in Our Great Little Town for hardly two years, and the latter  for
hardly  a month; when Monsieur wants to get the whole damned thing over with
as quickly as possible, and Madame gives in with a tolerant smile; then,  my
reader,  the  wedding  is generally a "quiet" affair. The bride may dispense
with a tiara of orange blossoms securing her finger-tip veil, nor  does  she
carry  a  white  orchid  in a prayer book. The bride's little daughter might
have added to the ceremonies uniting H. and H. a touch of vivid vermeil; but
I knew I would not  dare  be  too  tender  with  cornered  Lolita  yet,  and
therefore  agreed  it  was  not  worth while tearing the child away from her
beloved Camp Q.

My soi-disant passionate and lonely Charlotte  was  in  everyday
life matter-of-fact and gregarious. Moreover, I discovered that although she
could  not  control  her  heart  or her cries, she was a woman of principle.
Immediately after she had become more  or  less  my  mistress  (despite  the
stimulants,  her  "nervous,  eager chиri--a heroic chиri!--had
some initial trouble, for which, however, he  amply  compensated  her  by  a
fantastic  display  of old-world endearments), good Charlotte interviewed me
about my relations with God. I could have answered that  on  that  score  my
mind was open; I said, instead--paying my tribute to a pious platitude--that
I  believed  in  a  cosmic spirit. Looking down at her fingernails, she also
asked me had I not in my family a certain strange  strain.  I  countered  by
inquiring  whether  she would still want to marry me if my father's maternal
grandfather had been, say, a Turk. She said it did not  matter  a  bit;  but
that,  if  she  ever  found  out I did not believe in Our Christian God, she
would commit suicide. She said it so solemnly that it gave me the creeps. It
was then I knew she was a woman of principle.

Oh, she was very genteel: she said "excuse me" whenever a  slight  burp
interrupted  her  flowing speech, called an envelope and ahnvelope, and when
talking to her lady-friends referred to me as  Mr.  Humbert.  I  thought  it
would  please her if I entered the community trailing some glamour after me.
On the day of our wedding a little interview with me appeared in the Society
Column of the Ramsdale Journal, with a photograph of  Charlotte,  one
eyebrow  up and a misprint in her name ("Hazer"). Despite this contretempts,
the publicity warmed the porcelain cockles of her heart--and made my rattles
shake with awful glee. by engaging in church work as well as by  getting  to
know  the  better  mothers  of  Lo's schoolmates, Charlotte in the course of
twenty months or so had managed to become if not a prominent,  at  least  an
acceptable  citizen,  but  never  before  had  she come under that thrilling
rubrique, and it was I who put her there, Mr.  Edgar  H.  Humbert  (I
threw  in  the  "Edgar"  just  for  the  heck of it), "writer and explorer."
McCoo's brother, when taking it down, asked me what I had written.  Whatever
I  told him came out as "several books on Peacock, Rainbow and other poets."
It was also noted that Charlotte and I had  known  each  other  for  several
years and that I was a distant relation of her first husband. I hinted I had
had  an  affair  with  her  thirteen years ago but this was not mentioned in
print. To Charlotte I said that  society  columns  should  contain  a
shimmer of errors.

Let  us  go  on  with  this  curious tale. When called upon to enjoy my
promotion from lodger  to  lover,  did  I  experience  only  bitterness  and
distaste?  No. Mr. Humbert confesses to a certain titillation of his vanity,
to some faint tenderness, even to a  pattern  of  remorse  daintily  running
along  the  steel of his conspiratorial dagger. Never had I thought that the
rather ridiculous, through rather handsome Mrs. Haze, with her  blind  faith
in  the wisdom of her church and book club, her mannerisms of elocution, her
harsh, cold, contemptuous attitude toward an adorable, downy-armed child  of
twelve, could turn into such a touching, helpless creature as soon as I laid
my  hands  upon her which happened on the threshold of Lolita's room whither
she tremulously backed repeating "no, no, please no."

The transformation improved her looks. Her smile that had been  such  a
contrived  thing,  thenceforth  became  the  radiance  of utter adoration--a
radiance having something soft and moist about it, in which, with wonder,  I
recognized  a  resemblance  to the lovely, inane, lost look that Lo had when
gloating over a new kind of  concoction  at  the  soda  fountain  or  mutely
admiring  my  expensive,  always  tailor-fresh clothes. Deeply fascinated, I
would watch Charlotte while she swapped parental woes with some  other  lady
and  made  that  national  grimace of feminine resignation (eyes rolling up,
mouth drooping sideways) which, in an infantile form, I had seen  Lo  making
herself.  We  had  highballs before turning in, and with their help, I would
manage to evoke the child while caressing the mother.  This  was  the  white
stomach  within which my nymphet had been a little curved fish in 1934. This
carefully dyed hair, so sterile to my sense of smell and touch, acquired  at
certain  lamplit moments in the poster bed the tinge, if not the texture, of
Lolita's  curls.  I  kept  telling  myself,  as  I  wielded   my   brand-new
large-as-life  wife,  that  biologically this was the nearest I could get to
Lolita; that at Lolita's age, Lotte had been as desirable  a  schoolgirl  as
her  daughter was, and as Lolita's daughter would be some day. I had my wife
unearth from under a collection of shoes (Mr. Haze had a passion  for  them,
it  appears)  a  thirty-year-old  album,  so  that I might see how Lotte had
looked as a child; and even though the  light  was  wrong  and  the  dresses
graceless,  I  was able to make out a dim first version of Lolita's outline,
legs, cheekbones, bobbed nose. Lottelita, Lolitchen.

So I tom-peeped across the hedges of years, into  wan  little  windows.
And  when, by means of pitifully ardent, naively lascivious caresses, she of
the noble nipple and massive thigh prepared me for  the  performance  of  my
nightly duty, it was still a nymphet's scent that in despair I tried to pick
up, as I bayed through the undergrowth of dark decaying forests.

I  simply  can't tell you how gentle, how touching my poor wife was. At
breakfast, in the depressingly bright kitchen, with its chrome  glitter  and
Hardware  and  Co.  Calendar and cute breakfast nook (simulating that Coffee
Shoppe where in their  college  days  Charlotte  and  Humbert  used  to  coo
together),  she  would  sit,  robed  in red, her elbow on the plastic-topped
table, her cheek propped on her fist,  and  stare  at  me  with  intolerable
tenderness  as  I consumed my ham and eggs. Humbert's face might twitch with
neuralgia, but in her eyes it vied in beauty and animation with the sun  and
shadows of leaves rippling on the white refrigerator. My solemn exasperation
was  to  her  the silence of love. My small income added to her even smaller
one impressed her as a brilliant fortune; not because the resulting sum  now
sufficed for most middle-class needs, but because even my money shone in her
eyes with the magic of my manliness, and she saw our joint account as one of
those  southern  boulevards  at midday that have solid shade on one side and
smooth sunshine on the other, all the way to the end of  a  prospect,  where
pink mountains loom.

Into   the  fifty  days  of  our  cohabitation  Charlotte  crammed  the
activities of as many years. The poor woman busied herself with a number  of
things she had foregone long before or had never been much interested in, as
if (to prolong these Proustian intonations) by my marrying the mother of the
child  I  loved  I  had  enabled  my wife to regain an abundance of youth by
proxy. With the zest of a banal young bride, she  started  to  "glorify  the
home."  Knowing  as  I  did its every cranny by heart--since those days when
from my chair I mentally mapped out Lolita's course through the house--I had
long entered into a sort of emotional relationship with it,  with  its  very
ugliness  and  dirt, and now I could almost feel the wretched thing cower in
its reluctance to endure the bath of ecru and ocher and  putt-buff-and-snuff
that  Charlotte planned to give it. She never got as far as that, thank God,
but she did use up a tremendous amount of energy in washing  window  shades,
waxing  the  slats of Venetian blinds, purchasing new shades and new blinds,
returning them to the store, replacing them by  others,  and  so  on,  in  a
constant  chiaroscuro of smiles and frowns, doubts and pouts. She dabbled in
cretonnes and chintzes; she changed the colors of the sofa--the sacred  sofa
where  a  bubble  of  paradise  had once burst in slow motion within me. She
rearranged the furniture--and was pleased when she  found,  in  a  household
treatise,  that  "it  is permissible to separate a pair of sofa commodes and
their companion lamps." With the authoress of Your Home Is  You,  she
developed  a  hatred for little lean chairs and spindle tables. She believed
that a room having a generous expanse  of  glass,  and  lots  of  rich  wood
paneling  was an example of the masculine type of room, whereas the feminine
type was characterized by lighter-looking windows and frailer woodwork.  The
novels  I  had  found  her  reading  when  I  moved  in were now replaced by
illustrated catalogues and homemaking guides. From a firm  located  at  4640
Roosevelt  Blvd.,  Philadelphia,  she  ordered  for our double bed a "damask
covered 312 coil mattress"--although the old one seemed to me resilient  and
durable enough for whatever it had to support.

A Midwesterner, as her late husband had also been, she had lived in coy
Ramsdale,  the gem of an eastern state, not long enough to know all the nice
people. She knew slightly  the  jovial  dentist  who  lived  in  a  kind  of
ramshackle  wooden  chateau behind our lawn. She had met at a church tea the
"snooty" wife of the local junk dealer who owned the "colonial" white horror
at the corner of the avenue. Now  and  then  she  "visited  with"  old  Miss
Opposite; but the more patrician matrons among those she called upon, or met
at  lawn  functions, or had telephone chats with--such dainty ladies as Mrs.
Glave, Mrs. Sheridan, Mrs. McCrystal, Mrs. Knight and others, seldom  seemed
to call on my neglected Charlotte. Indeed, the only couple with whom she had
relations  of  real  cordiality,  devoid  of  any  arriхre-pensиe  or
practical foresight, were the Farlows who had just come back from a business
trip to Chile in time to attend our wedding, with  the  Chatfields,  McCoos,
and  a  few others (but not Mrs. Junk or the even prouder Mrs. Talbot).