The King sighed and began to undress. His camp bed and a bedtable had 
been placed, facing the window, in the northeast corner. East was the 
turquoise door; north, the door of the gallery; west, the door of the 
closet; south, the window. His black blazer and white trousers were 
taken away by his former valet's valet. The King sat down on the edge 
of the bed in his pajamas. The man returned with a pair of morocco bed 
slippers, pulled them on his master's listless feet, and was off with 
the discarded pumps. The King's wandering gaze stopped at the casement 
which was half open. One could see part of the dimly lit court where 
under an enclosed poplar two soldiers on a stone bench were playing 
lansquenet. The summer night was starless and stirless, with distant 
spasms of silent lightning. Around the lantern that stood on the bench 
a batlike moth blindly flapped - until the punter knocked it down with 
his cap. The King yawned, and the illumined card players shivered and 
dissolved in the prism of his tears. His bored glance traveled from 
wall to wall. The gallery door stood slightly ajar, and one could hear 
the steps of the guard coming and going. Above the closet, Iris Acht 
squared her shoulders and looked away. A cricket cricked. The bedside 
light was just strong enough to put a bright gleam on the gilt key in 
the lock of the closet door. And all at once that spark on that key 
caused a wonderful conflagration to spread in the prisoner's mind.

We shall now go back from mid-August 1958 to a certain afternoon in May 
three decades earlier when he was a dark strong lad of thirteen with a 
silver ring on the forefinger of his sun-tanned hand. Queen Blenda, his 
mother, had recently left for Vienna and Rome. He had several dear 
playmates but none could compete with Oleg, Duke of Rahl. In those days 
growing boys of high-born families wore on festive occasions-of which 
we had so many during our long northern spring-sleeveless jerseys, 
white anklesocks with black buckle shoes, and very tight, very short 
shorts called _hotinguens_. I wish I could provide the reader with 
cut-out figures and parts of attire as given in paper-doll charts for 
children armed with scissors. It would brighten a little these dark 
evenings that are destroying my brain. Both lads were handsome, 
long-legged specimens of Varangian boyhood. At twelve, Oleg was the 
best center forward at the Ducal School. When stripped and shiny in the 
mist of the bath house, his bold virilia contrasted harshly with his 
girlish grace. He was a regular faunlet. On that particular afternoon a 
copious shower lacquered the spring foliage of the palace garden, and 
oh, how the Persian lilacs in riotous bloom tumbled and tossed behind 
the green-streaming, amethyst-blotched windowpanes! One would have to 
play indoors. Oleg was late. Would he come at all?

It occurred to the young Prince to disinter a set of precious toys (the 
gift of a foreign potentate who had.recently been assassinated) which 
had amused Oleg and him during a previous Easter, and then had been 
laid aside as happens with those special, artistic playthings which 
allow iheir bubble of pleasure to yield all its tang at once before 
retreating into museum oblivion. What he particularly desired to 
rediscover now was an elaborate toy circus contained in a box as big as 
a croquet case. He craved for it; his eyes, his brain, and that in his 
brain which corresponded to the ball of his thumb, vividly remembered 
the brown boy acrobats with spangled nates, an elegant and melancholy 
clown with a ruff, and especially three pup-sized elephants of polished 
wood with such versatile joints that you could make the sleek jumbo 
stand upright on one foreleg or rear up solidly on the top of a small 
white barrel ringed with red. Less than a fortnight had passed since 
Oleg's last visit, when for the first time the two boys had been 
allowed to share the same bed, and the tingle of their misbehavior, and 
the foreglow of another such night, were now mixed in our young Prince 
with an embarrassment that suggested refuge in earlier, more innocent 
games.

His English tutor who, after a picnic in Mandevil Forest, was laid up 
with a sprained ankle, did not know where that circus might be; he 
advised looking for it in an old lumber room at the end of the West 
Gallery. Thither the Prince betook himself. That dusty black trunk? It 
looked grimly negative. The rain was more audible here owing to the 
proximity of a prolix gutter pipe. What about the closet? Its gilt key 
turned reluctantly. All three shelves and the space beneath were 
stuffed with disparate objects: a palette. with the dregs of many 
sunsets; a cupful of counters; an ivory backscratcher, a thirty-twomo 
edition of _Timon of Athens_ translated into Zemblan by his uncle 
Conmal, the Queen's brother; a seaside _situla_ (toy pail); a 
sixty-five-carat blue diamond accidentally added in his childhood, from 
his late father's knickknackatory, to the pebbles and shells in that 
pail; a finger of chalk; and a square board with a design of interlaced 
figures for some long-forgotten game. He was about to look elsewhere in 
the closet when on trying to dislodge a piece of black velvet, one 
corner of which had unaccountably got caught behind the shelf, 
something gave, the shelf budged, proved removable, and revealed just 
under its farther edge, in the back of the closet, a keyhole to which 
the same gilt key was found to fit.

Impatiently he cleared the other two shelves of all they held (mainly 
old clothes and shoes), removed them as he had done with the middle 
one, and unlocked the sliding door at the back of the closet. The 
elephants were forgotten, he stood on the threshold of a secret 
passage. Its deep darkness was total but something about its speluncar 
acoustics foretold, clearing its throat hollowly, great things, and he 
hurried to his own quarters to fetch a couple of flashlights and a 
pedometer. As he was returning, Oleg arrived: He carried a tulip. His 
soft blond locks had been cut since his last visit to the palace, and 
the young Prince thought: Yes, I knew he would be different. But when 
Oleg knitted his golden brows and bent close to hear about the 
discovery, the young Prince knew by the downy warmth of that crimson 
ear and by the vivacious nod greeting the proposed investigation, that 
no change had occurred in his dear bedfellow.

As soon as Monsieur Beauchamp had sat down for a game of chess at the 
bedside of Mr. Campbell and had offered his raised fists to choose 
from, the young Prince took Oleg to the magical closet. The wary, 
silent, green-carpeted steps of an _escalier derobe_ led to a 
stone-paved underground passage. Strictly speaking it was "underground" 
only in brief spells when, after burrowing under the southwest 
vestibule next to the lumber room, it went under a series of terraces, 
under the avenue of birches in the royal park, and then under the three 
transverse streets, Academy Boulevard, Coriolanus Lane and Timon 
Alley, that still separated it from its final destination. Otherwise, 
in its angular and cryptic course it adapted itself to the various 
structures which it followed, here availing itself of a bulwark to fit 
in its side like a pencil in the pencil hold of a pocket diary, there 
running through the cellars of a great mansion too rich in dark 
passageways to notice the stealthy intrusion. Possibly, in the 
intervening years, certain arcane connections had been established 
between the abandoned passage and the outer world by the random 
repercussions of work in surrounding layers of masonry or by the blind 
pokings of time itself; for here and there magic apertures and 
penetrations, so narrow and deep as to drive one insane, could be 
deduced from a pool of sweet, foul ditch water, bespeaking a moat, or 
from a dusky odor of earth and turf, marking the proximity of a glacis 
slope overhead; and at one point, where the passage crept through the 
basement of a huge ducal villa, with hothouses famous for their 
collections of desert flora, a light spread of sand momentarily changed 
the sound of one's tread. Oleg walked in front: his shapely buttocks 
encased in tight indigo cotton moved alertly, and his own erect 
radiance, rather than his flambeau, seemed to illume with leaps of 
light the low ceiling and crowding wails. Behind him the young Prince's 
electric torch played on the ground and gave a coating of flour to the 
back of Oleg's bare thighs. The air was musty and cold. On and on went 
the fantastic burrow. It developed a slight ascending grade. The 
pedometer had tocked off 1,888 yards, when at last they reached the 
end. The magic key of the lumber room closet slipped with gratifying 
ease into the keyhole of a green door confronting them, and would have 
accomplished the act promised by its smooth entrance, had not a burst 
of strange sounds coming from behind the door caused our explorers to 
pause. Two terrible voices, a man's and a woman's, now rising to a 
passionate pitch, now sinking to raucous undertones, were exchanging 
insults in Gutnish as spoken by the fisherfolk of Western Zembla. An 
abominable threat made the woman shriek out in fright. Sudden silence 
ensued, presently broken by the man's murmuring some brief phrase of 
casual approval ("Perfect, my dear," or "Couldn't be better") that was 
more eerie than anything that had come before.

Without consulting each other, the young Prince and his friend veered 
in absurd panic and, with the pedometer beating wildly, raced back the 
way they had come. "Ouf!" said Oleg once the last shelf had been 
replaced. "You're all chalky behind," said the young Prince as they 
swung upstairs. They found Beauchamp and Campbell ending their game in 
a draw. It was near dinner time. The two lads were told to wash their 
hands. The recent thrill of adventure had been superseded already by 
another sort of excitement. They locked themselves up. The tap ran 
unheeded. Both were in a manly state and moaning like doves.

This detailed recollection, whose structure and maculation have taken 
some time to describe in this note, skimmed through the King's memory 
in one instant. Certain creatures of the past, and this was one of 
them, may lie dormant for thirty years as this one had, while their 
natural habitat undergoes calamitous alterations. Soon after the 
discovery of the secret passage he almost died of pneumonia. In his 
delirium he would strive one moment to follow a luminous disk probing 
an endless tunnel and try the next to clasp the melting haunches of his 
fair ingle. To recuperate he was sent for a couple of seasons to 
southern Europe. The death of Oleg at fifteen, in a toboggan accident, 
helped to obliterate the reality of their adventure. A national 
revolution was needed to make that secret passage real again.

Having satisfied himself that the guard's creaky steps had moved some 
distance away, the King opened the closet. It was empty now, save for 
the tiny volume of _Timon Afinsken_ still lying in one corner, and for 
some old sport clothes and gymnasium shoes crammed into the bottom 
compartment. The footfalls were now coming back. He did not dare pursue 
his examination and relocked the closet door.

It was evident he would need a few moments of perfect security to 
perform with a minimum of noise a succession of small actions: enter 
the closet, lock it from the inside, remove the shelves, open the 
secret door, replace the shelves, slip into the yawning darkness, close 
the secret door and lock it. Say ninety seconds.

He stepped out into the gallery, and the guard, a rather handsome but 
incredibly stupid Extremist, immediately advanced towards him. "I have 
a certain urgent desire," said the King. "I want, Hal, to play the 
piano before going to bed." Hal (if that was his name) led the way to 
the music room where, as, the King knew, Odon kept vigil over the 
shrouded harp. He was a fox-browed, burly Irishman, with a pink head 
now covered by the rakish cap of a Russki factory worker. The King sat 
down at the Bechstein and, as soon as they were left alone, explained 
briefly the situation while making tinkling notes with one hand: "Never 
heard of any passage," muttered Odon with the annoyance of a chess 
player who is shown how he might have saved the game he has lost. Was 
His Majesty absolutely sure? His Majesty was. Did he suppose it took 
one out of the Palace? Definitely out of the Palace.

Anyway, Odon had to leave in a few moments, being due to act that night 
in _The Merman_, a fine old melodrama which had not been performed, he 
said, for at least three decades. "I'm quite satisfied with my own 
melodrama," remarked the King. "Alas," said Odon. Furrowing his 
forehead, he slowly got into his leathern coat. One could do nothing 
tonight. If he asked the commandant to be left on duty, it would only 
provoke suspicion, and the least suspicion might be fatal. Tomorrow he 
would find some opportunity to inspect that new avenue of escape, if it 
was that and not a dead end. Would Charlie (His Majesty) promise not to 
attempt anything until then? "But they are moving closer and closer," 
said the King alluding to the noise of rapping and ripping that came 
from the Picture Gallery. "Not really," said Odon, "one inch per hour, 
maybe two. I must be going now," he added indicating with a twitch of 
the eyelid the solemn and corpulent guard who was coming to relieve 
him.

Under the unshakable but quite erroneous belief that the crown jewels 
were concealed somewhere in the Palace, the new administration had 
engaged a couple of foreign experts (see note to line 681) to locate 
them. The good work had been going on for a month. The two Russians, 
after practically dismantling the Council Chamber and several other 
rooms of state, had transferred their activities to that part of the 
gallery where the huge oils of Eystein had fascinated several 
generations of Zemblan princes and princesses. While unable to catch a 
likeness, and therefore wisely limiting himself to a conventional style 
of complimentary portraiture, Eystein showed himself to be a prodigious 
master of the trompe l'oeil in the depiction of various objects 
surrounding his dignified dead models and making them look even deader 
by contrast to the fallen petal or the polished panel that he rendered 
with such love and skill. But in some of these portraits Eystein had 
also resorted to a weird form of trickery: among his decorations of 
wood or wool, gold or velvet, he would insert one which was really made 
of the material elsewhere imitated by paint. This device which was 
apparently meant to enhance the effect of his tactile and tonal values 
had, however, something ignoble about it and disclosed not only an 
essential flaw in Eystein's talent, but the basic fact that "reality" 
is neither the subject nor the object of true art which creates its own 
special reality having nothing to do with the average "reality" 
perceived by the communal eye. But to return to our technicians whose 
tapping is approaching the gallery toward the bend where the King and 
Odon stand ready to part. At this spot hung a portrait representing a 
former Keeper of the Treasure, decrepit Count Kernel, who was painted 
with fingers resting lightly on an embossed and emblazoned box whose 
side facing the spectator consisted of an inset oblong made of real 
bronze, while upon the shaded top of the box, drawn in perspective, the 
artist had pictured a plate with the beautifully executed, twin-lobed, 
brainlike, halved kernel of a walnut.

"They are in for a surprise," murmured Odon in his mother tongue, while 
in a corner the fat guard was going through some dutiful, rather 
lonesome, rifle-butt-banging formalities.

The two Soviet professionals could be excused for assuming they would 
find a real receptacle behind the real metal. At the present moment 
they were about to decide whether to pry out the plaque or take down 
the picture; but we can anticipate a little and assure the reader that 
the receptacle, an oblong hole in the wall, was there all right; it 
contained nothing, however, except the broken bits of a nutshell.

Somewhere an iron curtain had gone up, baring a painted one, with 
nymphs and nenuphars. "I shall bring you your flute tomorrow," cried 
Odon meaningfully in the vernacular, and smiled, and waved, already 
bemisted, already receding into the remoteness of his Thespian world.

The fat guard led the King back to his room and turned him over to 
handsome Hal. It was half past nine. The King went to bed. The valet, 
a moody rascal, brought him his usual milk and cognac nightcap and took 
away his slippers and dressing gown. The man was practically out of the 
room when the King commanded him to put out the light, upon which an 
arm re-entered and a gloved hand found and turned the switch. Distant 
lightning still throbbed now and then in the window. The King finished 
his drink in the dark and replaced the empty tumbler on the night table 
where it knocked with a subdued ring against a steel flashlight 
prepared by the thoughtful authorities in case electricity failed as it 
lately did now and then.

He could not sleep. Turning his head he watched the line of light under 
the door. Presently it was gently opened and his handsome young jailer 
peeped in. A bizarre little thought danced through the King's mind; but 
all the youth wanted was to warn his prisoner that he intended to join 
his companions in the adjacent court, and that the door would be locked 
until he returned. If, however, the ex-King needed anything, he could 
call from his window. "How long will you be absent?" asked the King. 
"_Yeg ved ik_ [I know not]," answered the guard. "Good night, bad boy," 
said the King.

He waited for the guard's silhouette to enter the light in the 
courtyard where the other Thuleans welcomed him to their game. Then, in 
secure darkness, the King rummaged for some clothes on the floor of the 
closet and pulled on, over his pajamas, what felt like skiing trousers 
and something that smelled like an old sweater. Further gropings 
yielded a pair of sneakers and a woolen headgear with flaps. He then 
went through the actions mentally rehearsed before. As he was removing 
the second shelf, an object fell with a miniature thud; he guessed what 
it was and took it with him as a talisman.

He dared not press the button of his torch until properly engulfed, 
nor could he afford a noisy stumble, and therefore negotiated the 
eighteen invisible steps in a more or less sitting position like a 
timid novice bum-scraping down the lichened rocks of Mt. Kron. The dim 
light he discharged at last was now his dearest companion, Oleg's 
ghost, the phantom of freedom. He experienced a blend of anguish and 
exultation, a kind of amorous joy, the like of which he had last known 
on the day of his coronation, when, as he walked to his throne, a few 
bars of incredibly rich, deep, plenteous music (whose authorship and 
physical source he was never able to ascertain) struck his ear, and he 
inhaled the hair oil of the pretty page who had bent to brush a rose 
petal off the footstool, and by the light of his torch the King now saw 
that he was hideously garbed in bright red.

The secret passage seemed to have grown more squalid. The intrusion of 
its surroundings was even more evident than on the day when two lads 
shivering in thin jerseys and shorts had explored it. The pool of 
opalescent ditch water had grown in length; along its edge walked a 
sick bat like a cripple with a broken umbrella. A remembered spread of 
colored sand bore the thirty-year-old patterned imprint of Oleg's shoe, 
as immortal as the tracks of an Egyptian child's tame gazelle made 
thirty centuries ago on blue Nilotic bricks drying in the sun. And, at 
the spot where the passage went through the foundations of a museum, 
there had somehow wandered down, to exile and disposal, a headless 
statue of Mercury, conductor of souls to the Lower World, and a cracked 
krater with two black figures shown dicing under a black palm.

The last bend of the passage, ending in the green door, contained an 
accumulation of loose boards across which the fugitive stepped not 
without stumbling. He unlocked the door and upon pulling it open was 
stopped by a heavy black drapery. As he began fumbling among its 
vertical folds for some sort of ingress, the weak light of his torch 
rolled its hopeless eye and went out. He dropped it: it fell into 
muffled nothingness. The King thrust both arms into the deep folds of 
the chocolate-smelling cloth and, despite the uncertainty and the 
danger of the moment, was, as it were, physically. reminded by his own 
movement of the comical, at first controlled, then frantic undulations 
of a theatrical curtain through which a nervous actor tries vainly to 
pass. This grotesque sensation, at this diabolical instant, solved the 
mystery of the passage even before he wriggled at last through the 
drapery into the dimly lit, dimly cluttered _lumbarkamer_ which had 
once been Iris Acht's dressing room in the Royal Theater. It still was 
what it had become after her death: a dusty hole of a room 
communicating with a kind of hall whither performers would sometimes 
wander during rehearsals. Pieces of mythological scenery leaning 
against the wall half concealed a large dusty velvet-framed photograph 
of King Thurgus - bushy mustache, pince-nez, medals - as he was at the 
time when the mile-long corridor provided an extravagant means for his 
trysts with Iris.

The scarlet-clothed fugitive blinked and made for the hall. It led to a 
number of dressing rooms. Somewhere beyond it a tempest of plaudits 
grew in volume before petering out. Other distant sounds marked the 
beginning of the intermission. Several costumed performers passed by 
the King, and in one of them he recognized Odon. He was wearing a 
velvet jacket with brass buttons, knickerbockers and striped stockings, 
the Sunday attire of Gutnish fishermen, and his fist still clutched the 
cardboard knife with which he had just dispatched his sweetheart. "Good 
God," he said on seeing the King.

Plucking a couple of cloaks from a heap of fantastic raiments, Odon 
pushed the King toward a staircase leading to the street. 
Simultaneously there was a commotion among a group of people smoking on 
the landing. An old intriguer who by dint of fawning on various 
Extremist officials had obtained the post of Scenic Director, suddenly 
pointed a vibrating finger at the King, but being afflicted with a bad 
stammer could not utter the words of indignant recognition which were 
making his dentures clack. The King tried to pull the front flap of his 
cap over his face - and almost lost his footing at the bottom of the 
narrow stairs. Outside it was raining. A puddle reflected his scarlet 
silhouette. Several vehicles stood in a transverse lane. It was there 
that Odon usually left his racing car. For one dreadful second he 
thought it was gone, but then recalled with exquisite relief that he 
had parked it that night in an adjacent alley. (See the interesting 
note to line 149).

_Lines 131-132:_ I was the shadow of the waxwing slain by feigned 
remoteness in the windowpane.

The exquisite melody of the two lines opening the poem is picked up 
here. The repetition of that long-drawn note is saved from monotony by 
the subtle variation in fine 132 where the assonance. between its 
second word and the rhyme gives the ear a kind of languorous pleasure 
as would the echo of some half-remembered sorrowful song whose strain 
is more meaningful than its words. Today, where the "feigned 
remoteness" has indeed performed its dreadful duty, and the poem we 
have is the only "shadow" that remains, we cannot help reading into 
these lines something more than mirrorplay and mirage shimmer. We feel 
doom, in the image of Gradus, eating away the miles and miles of 
"feigned remoteness" between him and poor Shade. He, too, is to meet, 
in his urgent and blind flight, a reflection that will shatter him.

Although Gradus availed himself of all varieties of locomotion - rented 
cars, local trains, escalators, airplanes - somehow the eye of the mind 
sees him, and the muscles of the mind feel him, as always streaking 
across the sky with black traveling bag in one hand and loosely folded 
umbrella in the other, in a sustained glide high over sea and land. The 
force propelling him is the magic action of Shade's poem itself, the 
very mechanism and sweep of verse, the powerful iambic motor. Never 
before has the inexorable advance of fate received such a sensuous form 
(for other images of that transcendental tramp's approach see note to 
line 17).

From behind a drapery, from behind a box tree, through the golden veil 
of evening and through the black lacery of night, I kept watching that 
lawn, that drive, that fanlight, those jewel-bright windows. The sun 
had not yet set when, at a quarter past seven, I heard the first 
guest's car. Oh, I saw them all. I saw ancient Dr. Sutton, a 
snowy-headed, perfectly oval little gentleman arrive in a tottering 
Ford with his tall daughter, Mrs. Starr, a war widow. I saw a couple, 
later identified for me as Mr. Colt, a local lawyer, and his wife, 
whose blundering Cadillac half entered my driveway before retreating in 
a flurry of luminous nictitation. I saw a world-famous old writer, bent 
under the incubus of literary honors and his own prolific mediocrity, 
arrive in a taxi out of the dim times of yore when Shade and he had 
been joint editors of a little review. I saw Frank, the Shades' 
handyman, depart in the station wagon. I saw a retired professor of 
ornithology walk up from the highway where he had illegally parked his 
car. I saw, ensconced in their tiny Pulex, manned by her boy-handsome 
tousle-haired girl friend, the patroness of the arts who had sponsored 
Aunt Maud's last exhibition, I saw Frank return with the New Wye 
antiquarian, purblind Mr. Kaplun, and his wife, a dilapidated eagle. I 
saw a Korean graduate student in dinner jacket come on a bicycle, and 
the college president in baggy suit come on foot. I saw, in the 
performance of their ceremonial duties, in light and shadow, and from 
window to window, where like Martians the martinis and highballs 
cruised, the two white-coated youths from the hotel school, and 
realized that I knew well, quite well, the slighter of the two. And 
finally, at half past eight (when, I imagine, the lady of the house had 
begun to crack her finger joints as was her impatient wont) a long 
black limousine, officially glossy and rather funereal, glided into the 
aura of the drive, and while the fat Negro chauffeur hastened to open 
the car door, I saw, with pity, my poet emerge from his house, a white 
flower in his buttonhole and a grin of welcome on his liquor-flushed 
face.

Next morning, as soon as I saw Sybil drive away to fetch Ruby the maid 
who did not sleep in the house, I crossed over with the prettily and 
reproachfully wrapped up carton. In front of their garage, on the 
ground, I noticed a _buchmann_, a little pillar of library books which 
Sybil had obviously forgotten there. I bent towards them under the 
incubus of curiosity: they were mostly by Mr. Faulkner; and the next 
moment Sybil wags back, her tires scrunching on the gravel right behind 
me. I added the books to my gift and placed the whole pile in her lap. 
That was nice of me - but what was that carton? Just a present for 
John. A present? Well, was it not his birthday yesterday? Yes, it was, 
but after all are not birthdays mere conventions? Conventions or not, 
but it was my birthday too - small difference of sixteen years, that's 
all. Oh my! Congratulations. And how did the party go? Well, you know 
what such parties are (here I reached in my pocket for another book - a 
book she did not expect). Yes, what are they? Oh, people whom you've 
known all your life and simply must invite once a year, men like Ben 
Kaplun and Dick Colt with whom we went to school, and that Washington 
cousin, and the fellow whose novels you and John think so phony. We did 
not ask you because we knew how tedious you find such affairs. This was 
my cue.

Niagarin who had lived in Canada spoke English and French; Andronnikov 
had some German. The little Zemblan they knew was pronounced with that 
comical Russian accent that gives vowels a kind of didactic plenitude 
of sound. They were considered models of dash by the Extremist guards, 
and my dear Odonello once earned a harsh reprimand from the commandant 
by not having withstood the temptation to imitate their walk: both 
moved with an identical little swagger, and both were conspicuously 
bandy-legged.

When I was a child, Russia enjoyed quite a vogue at the court of Zembla 
but that was a different Russia - a Russia that hated tyrants and 
Philistines, injustice and cruelty, the Russia of ladies and gentlemen 
and liberal aspirations. We may add that Charles the Beloved could 
boast of some Russian blood. In medieval times two of his ancestors had 
married Novgorod princesses. Queen Yaruga (reigned 1799-1800) his 
great-great-granddam, was half Russian; and most historians believe 
that Yaruga's only child Igor was not the son of Uran the Last (reigned 
1798-1799) but the fruit of her amours with the Russian adventurer 
Hodinski, her _goliart_ (court jester) and a poet of genius, said to 
have forged in his spare time a famous old Russian _chanson de geste_ 
generally attributed to an anonymous bard of the twelfth century.

Upon arriving after five at the New Wye airport he drank two 
papercupfuls of nice cold milk from a dispenser and acquired a map at 
the desk. With broad blunt finger tapping the configuration of the 
campus that resembled a writhing stomach, he asked the clerk what hotel 
was nearest to the university. A car, he was told, would take him to 
the Campus Hotel which was a few minutes' walk from the Main Hall (now 
Shade Hall). During the ride he suddenly became aware of such urgent 
qualms that he was forced to visit the washroom as soon as he got to 
the solidly booked hotel. There his misery resolved itself in a 
scaldinging torrent of indigestion. Hardly had he refastened his 
trousers and checked the bulge of his hip pocket than a renewal of 
stabs and squeaks caused him to strip his thighs again which he did 
with such awkward precipitation that his small Browning was all but 
sent flying into the depths of the toilet.

He was still groaning and grinding his dentures when he and his 
briefcase re-offended the sun.  It shone with all sorts of speckled 
effects through the trees. and College Town was gay with summer 
students and visiting linguists, among whom Gradus might have easily 
passed for a salesman hawking Basic-English primers for American 
schoolchildren or those wonderful new translating machines that can do 
it so much faster than a man or an animal.

A grave disappointment awaited him at Main Hall: it had closed for the 
day. Three students lying on the grass suggested he try the Library, 
and all three pointed to it across the lawn. Thither trudged our thug.

Nevertheless, I have had my little revenge: public misapprehension 
indirectly helped me to obtain the right of publishing _Pale Fire_. My 
good gardener, when enthusiastically relating to everybody what he had 
seen, certainly erred in several respects - not so much perhaps in his 
exaggerated account of my "heroism" as in the assumption that Shade had 
been deliberately aimed at by the so-called Jack Grey; but Shade's 
widow found herself so deeply affected by the idea of my having "thrown 
myself" between the gunman and his target that during a scene I shall 
never forget, she cried out, stroking my hands: "There are things for 
which no recompense in this world or another is great enough." That 
"other world" comes in handy when misfortune befalls the infidel but I 
let it pass of course, and, indeed, resolved not to refute anything, 
saying instead: "Oh, but there _is_ a recompense, my dear Sybil. It may 
seem to you a very modest request but - give me the permission, Sybil, 
to edit and publish John's last poem." The permission was given at 
once, with new cries and new hugs, and already next day her signature 
was under the agreement I had a quick little lawyer draw up. That 
moment of grateful grief you soon forgot, dear girl. But I assure you 
that I do not mean any harm, and that John Shade perhaps, will not be 
too much annoyed by my notes, despite the intrigues and the dirt.

Because of these machinations I was confronted with nightmare problems 
in my endeavors to make people calmly see - without having them 
immediately scream and hustle me - the truth of the tragedy - a tragedy 
in which I had been not a "chance witness" but the protagonist, and the 
main, if only potential, victim. The hullabaloo ended by affecting the 
course of my new life, and necessitated my removal to this modest 
mountain cabin; but I did manage to obtain, soon after his detention, 
an interview, perhaps even two interviews, with the prisoner. He was 
now much, more lucid than when he cowered bleeding on my porch step, 
and he told me all I wanted to know. By making him believe I could help 
him at his trial I forced him to confess his heinous crime - his 
deceiving the police and the nation by posing as Jack Grey, escapee 
from an asylum, who mistook Shade for the man who sent him there. A few 
days later, alas, he thwarted justice by slitting his throat with a 
safety razor blade salvaged from an unwatched garbage container. He 
died, not so much because having played his part in the story he saw no 
point in existing any longer, but because he could not live down this 
last crowning botch - killing the wrong person when the right one stood 
before him. In other words, his life ended not in a feeble splutter of 
the clockwork but in a gesture of humanoid despair. Enough of this. 
Exit Jack Grey.

I cannot recall without a shudder the lugubrious week that I spent in 
New Wye before leaving it, I hope, forever. I lived in constant fear 
that robbers would deprive me of my tender treasure. Some of my readers 
may laugh when they learn that I fussily removed it from my black 
valise to an empty steel box in my landlord's study, and a few hours 
later took the manuscript out again, and for several days _wore_ it, as 
it were, having distributed the ninety-two index cards about my person, 
twenty in the right-hand pocket of my coat, as many in the left-hand 
one, a batch of forty against my right nipple and the twelve precious 
ones with variants in my innermost left-breast pocket. I blessed my 
royal stars for having taught myself wife work, for I now sewed up all 
four pockets. Thus with cautious steps, among deceived enemies, I 
circulated, plated with poetry, armored with rhymes, stout with another 
man's song, stiff with cardboard, bullet-proof at long last.