Ah, Janice.  He sighs.  Screw you.  Just screw you.  She looks at him
clearly a long moment.  I'll get supper, she at last decides.  He is
all repentance.  I'll run over and get the car and bring the kid back. 
The poor kid must think he has no home.  What the hell makes your
mother think my mother has nothing better to do than take care of other
people's kids?  Indignation rises in him again at her missing the point
of why he wanted to watch Jimmy, for professional reasons, to earn a
living to buy oranges for her to put into her rotten Old-fashioneds.
She moves into the kitchen, angry but not angry enough.  She should be
really sore, or not sore at all, since all he had said was what he had
done a couple hundred times.  Maybe a thousand times.  Say, on the
average once every three days since 1956.  What's that?  Three hundred.
That often?  Then why is it always an effort?  She used to make it
easier before they got married.  She could be sudden then.  Just a
girl. Nerves , like new thread.  Skin smelled like fresh cotton.  Her
girl friend at work had an apartment in Brewer they used.  Pipe-framed
bed, silver medallions in the wallpaper; a view westward of the great
blue gas tanks by the edge of the river.  After work, working both at
Kroll's then, she selling candy and cashews in a white smock with Jan
stitched on her pocket and he lugging easy chairs and maple end tables
around on the floor above, hammering apart packing crates from nine to
five, the itch of the packing excelsior getting into his nose and eyes
and making them burn.  That filthy black crescent of bins behind the
elevators, the floor covered with bent nails, his palms black and
Chandler the dandy mincing in every hour on the hour telling him to
wash his hands so he wouldn't foul the furniture.  Lava soap.  It's
lather was gray.  His hands grew yellow calluses from using the
crowbar.  After 5:30, the dirty day done, they would meet by the doors,
chained to keep customers out, a green-glass-paved chamber of silence
between the two sets of doors, in the shallow side windows the bodiless
mannequin heads in their feathered hats and necklaces of pink pearls
eavesdropping on the echoing farewell gossip.  Every employee hated
Kroll's; yet they left it slow as swimming.  Janice and Rabbit would
meet in this chamber, with the dim light and green floor like something
underwater, and push at the one unchained door, push up into the light,
and walk, never admitting they were going there, toward the silver
medallions, hand in hand tired walking gently against the current of
home going traffic, and make love with the late daylight coming level
in the window.  She was shy about him seeing her.  She made him keep
his eyes shut.  And then with a shiver come as soon as he was in, her
inside softly grainy, like a silk slipper.  Lying side by side on this
other girl's bed, feeling lost, having done the final thing; the wall's
silver and the fading day's gold.  The kitchen is a narrow room off the
living-room, a tight aisle between machines that were modern five years
ago.  She drops something metal, a pan or cup.  Think you can make it
without burning yourself?  he calls in.

Are you still here?  is the answer.  He goes to the closet and takes
out the coat he hung up so neatly.  It seems to him he's the only
person around here who cares about neatness.  The clutter behind him in
the room the Oldfashioned glass with its corrupt dregs, the choked
ashtray balanced on the easy-chair arm, the rumpled rug, the floppy
stacks of slippery newspapers, the kid's toys here and there broken and
stuck and jammed, a leg off a doll and a piece of bent cardboard that
went with some breakfast-box cutout, the rolls of fuzz under the
radiators, the continual crisscrossing mess clings to his back like a
tightening net. He tries to sort out picking up his car and then his
kid.  Or should he pick up the kid first?  He wants more to see the
kid.  It would be quicker to walk over to Mrs.  Springer's, she lived
closer.  But suppose she was watching out the window for him to come so
she could pop out and tell him how tired Janice looked?  Who wouldn't
be tired after tramping around trying to buy something with you you
miserable nickel-hugger?  You fat hag.  You old gypsy.  If he had the
kid along this might not happen.  Rabbit likes the idea of walking up
from his mother's place with his boy.  Two-and-a-half, Nelson walks
like a trooper, with choppy stubborn steps.  They'd walk along in the
day's last light under the trees and then like magic there would be
Daddy's car at a curb.  But it will take longer this way, what with his
own mother talking slyly and round-about about how incompetent Janice
is. It ruined him when his mother went on like that; maybe she did it
just to kid him, but he couldn't take her lightly, she was somehow too
powerful, at least with him.  He had better go for the car first and
pick the kid up with it.  But he doesn't want to do it this way.  He
just doesn't.  The problem knits in front of him and he feels sickened
by the intricacy.  Janice calls from the kitchen, And honey pick up a
pack of cigarettes could you?  in a normal voice that says everything
is forgiven, everything is the same.  Rabbit freezes, standing looking
at his faint yellow shadow on the white door that leads to the hall,
and senses he is in a trap.  It seems certain.  In disgust he goes out.
Outdoors it is growing dark and cool.  The Norwegian maples exhale the
smell of their sticky new buds and the broad living-room windows along
Wilbur Street show beyond the silver patch of a television set the warm
bulbs burning in kitchens, like fires at the backs of caves.  He walks
downhill.  The day is gathering itself in.  He now and then touches
with his hand the rough bark of a tree or the dry twigs of a hedge, to
give himself the small answer of a texture.  At the corner, where
Wilbur Street meets Potter Avenue, a mailbox stands leaning in twilight
on its concrete post.  Tall two petaled street sign, the cleat-gouged
trunk of the telephone pole holding its insulators against the sky,
fire hydrant like a golden bush: a grove.  He used to love to climb the
poles.  To shinny up from a friend's shoulders until the ladder of
spikes came to your hands, to get up to where you could hear the wires
sing. Terrifying motionless whisper.  It always tempted you to fall, to
let the hard spikes in your palms go and feel the space on your back,
feel it take your feet and ride up your spine as you fell.  He
remembers how hot your hands felt at the top, rubbed full of splinters
from getting up to where the spikes began.  Listening to the wires as
if you could hear what people were saying, what all that secret adult
world was about.  The insulators giant blue eggs in a windy nest.  As
he walks along Potter Avenue the wires at their silent height strike
into and through the crowns of the breathing maples.  At the next
corner, where the water from the ice plant used to come down, sob into
a drain, and reappear on the other side of the street, Rabbit crosses
over and walks beside the gutter where the water used to run, coating
the shallow side of its course with ribbons of green slime waving and
waiting to slip under your feet and dunk you if you dared walk on them.
He can remember falling in but not why he was walking along this
slippery edge in the first place.  Then he remembers.  To impress the
girls Lotty Bingaman, Margaret Schoelkopf, sometimes June Cobb and Mary
Hoyer he walked home from grade school with.  Margaret's nose would
often start bleeding, for no reason.  She had worn high button shoes. 
He turns down Kegerise Street, a narrow gravel alley curving past the
blank back side of a small box factory where mostly middle-aged women
work, the cement-block face of a wholesale beer outlet, and a truly old
stone farmhouse, now boarded up, one of the oldest buildings in town,
thick crude masonry of Indianskin sandstone.  This building, which once
commanded half of the acreage the town is now built on, still retains,
behind a shattered and vandalized fence, its yard, a junk heap of brown
stalks and eroded timber that will in the summer bloom with an unwanted
wealth of weeds, waxy green wands and milky pods of silk seeds and airy
yellow heads almost liquid with pollen.  So there is some space between
the old farmhouse and the Sunshine Athletic Association, a tall thin
brick building like a city tenement misplaced in this disordered alley
of backsides and leftovers.  The entrance is made ominous by a strange
sheathing, the size of an outhouse, erected each winter on the stone
steps, to protect the bar from the weather.  Rabbit has several times
entered the club.  There was no sunshine in it.  The first floor was a
bar and the second was full of card tables where the old bucks of the
town sat muttering strategically.  Alcohol and cards Rabbit both
associates with a depressing kind of sin, sin with bad breath, and he
was further depressed by the political air of the place.  His old
basketball coach, Marty Tothero, who before scandal had ousted him from
the high school had a certain grip on local affairs, lived in this
building supposedly and still, they said, manipulated.  Rabbit dislikes
manipulation but he had liked Tothero.  Next to his mother Tothero had
had the most force.  The thought of his old coach crouching in there
frightens him.  He walks on, past a body shop and an unused chicken
house.  His progress is always down, for the town of Mt.  Judge is
built on the east side of the mountain Mt.  Judge, whose west face
overlooks the city of Brewer.  Though the town and the city meet along
the highway that skirts the mountain on the south on the way to
Philadelphia fifty miles away, they will never merge, for between them
the mountain lifts a broad green spine, two miles long north to south,
assaulted by gravel pits and cemeteries and new developments but above
a line preserved, hundreds of acres of forest Mt.  Judge boys can never
wholly explore.  Much of it is penetrated by the sound of cars climbing
the scenic drives in second gear.  But in long patches of forgotten
pine plantation the needle-hushed floor of land glides up and up, on
and on, under endless tunnels of dead green and you seem to have passed
through silence into something worse.  And then, coming upon a patch of
sunlight the branches neglect to keep out or upon a softened
stone-filled cellar pit dug by some brave and monstrous settler
centuries ago, you become vividly frightened, as if this other sign of
life will call attention to yourself, and the menace of the trees will
become active.  Your fear trills like an alarm bell you cannot shut
off, the louder the faster you run, hunchbacked, until distinctly, with
a gasp of the clutch, a near car shifts gears, and the stumpy white
posts of the guard fence dawn behind the pine trunks.  Then, safe on
the firm blacktop, you decide whether to walk back down home or to hike
up to the Pinnacle Hotel for a candy bar and a view of Brewer spread
out below like a carpet, a red city, where they paint wood, tin, even
red bricks red, an orange rose flowerpot red that is unlike the color
of any other city in the world yet to the children of the county is the
only color of cities, the color all cities are.  The mountain brings
dusk early to the town.  Now, just a few minutes after six a day before
the vernal equinox, all the houses and gravel-roofed factories and
diagonal hillside streets are in the shadow that washes deep into the
valley of farmland east of the mountain.  Huts on the shadow's shore,
twin rows of ranch-houses blare from their picture windows the
reflection of the setting sun.  One by one, as suddenly as lamps, these
windows dim as the sunlight ebbs, drawing across the development and
across the tan fenced land waiting for planting and a golf course that
at the distance could be a long pasture except for the yellow beans of
sand; drawing upward into the opposing hills on whose westward slopes
it still burns with afternoon pride.  Rabbit pauses at the end of the
alley, where he has an open view.  He used to caddy over there. 
Pricked by an indefinite urgency, he turns away, going left on Jackson
Road, where he lived for twenty years.  His parents' home is in a
two-family brick house on the corner; but it is their neighbors, the
Bolgers, who have the corner half, with a narrow side yard Mrs. 
Angstrom has always envied.  The Bolgers' windows getting all that
light and here we sit wedged in.  Rabbit stealthily approaches his old
home on the grass, hopping the little barberry hedge and the wire meant
to keep kids on the pavement.  He sneaks down the strip of grass
between the two cement walks that go with the two brick walls; he used
to live behind the one and the Zims behind the other.  All day long
Mrs.  Zim, who was plain, with big thyroid eyes and bluish, slack skin,
screamed at her daughter Carolyn, who was prettier than you'd think a
five-year-old girl could be.  Mr.  Zim was a thick-lipped redhead, and
in Carolyn thick and thin, red and blue, health and highstrungness had
blended just right; her beauty was not merely precocious but somehow
absolutely, apart from age, exotic.  Even Harry, six years older, saw
this.  All day long Mrs. Zim screamed at her and when Mr.  Zim came
home from work the two of them would shout together for hours.  It
would begin with Mr. defending the little girl, and then as the
neighbors listened old wounds opened like complicated flowers in the
night.  Sometimes Mom said that Mr.  would murder Mrs."  sometimes she
said that the little girl would murder them both, as they lay asleep. 
It was true there was something cold-blooded about Carolyn; when she
reached school age, she never left the house without a smile on her
little heart-face, swinging herself along like she owned the world,
though the Angstroms had just heard her mother throw hysterics at her
all through breakfast, the kitchen windows not six feet apart.  How
does that poor man endure?  If Carolyn and her mother don't settle
their differences they're going to wake up some fair morning without a
protector.  But Mom was never proved right in any of her predictions. 
When the Zims left, it was together, Mr.  and Mrs.  and Carolyn,
vanishing in a station wagon while half their furniture still stood on
the sidewalk beside the mover's truck.  He had a new job in Cleveland,
Ohio.  Poor souls, they won't be missed.  But they were.  They had sold
their half-house to an old couple, strict Methodists, and the old man
refused to cut the strip of grass between his house and the Angstroms'.
Mr.  Zim, who worked outdoors rain or shine on weekends, as if it's
his only pleasure in life and I don't wonder, had always cut it.  The
old Methodist cut exactly his half, one swath of a lawnmower, and then
pushed his lawnmower back inverted on his own walk, when it would have
been just as easy to push it back along the other half of the strip and
not leave such a ridiculous job.  When I hear that old fool's wheels
rattle along his walk so self-righteously, my blood pressure goes up so
I hear my ears pop.  Mother refused to let him or his father mow their
half for one whole summer, and the grass grew knee-high in that little
sunless space and stalks of like wheat came up and one or two goldenrod
until a man from the town came around in August and said they must cut
it on account of an ordinance; he was sorry.  Harry had gone to the
door and was saying, Sure, O.K."  when Mother came up behind him
saying, What did he mean?  That was her flowerbed.  She had no
intention of letting it be destroyed.  As her son, Rabbit felt terribly
embarrassed.  The man just looked at her and got a little thumbed book
out of his hip pocket and showed her the ordinance.  She still said it
was her flowerbed.  The man read to her what the fine was and went off
the porch.  That Saturday when she was in Brewer shopping, Pop got the
sickle out of the garage and chopped all the weeds down and Harry
pushed the lawnmower back and forth across the stubble until it looked
as trim as the Methodist's half, though browner.  He felt guilty doing
it, and was frightened of the fight his parents would have when Mother
came back.  He dreaded their quarrels: when their faces went angry and
flat and words flew, it was as if a pane of glass were put in front of
him; cutting off air; his strength drained away and he had to go to a
far corner of the house.  This time there was no fight.  His father
shocked him by simply lying, and doubled the shock by winking as he
did.  He told her the Methodist had at last broken down and cut the
strip of grass himself.  Mother believed it but wasn't pleased; she
talked all the rest of the day and off and on all week about suing the
old holy-roller.  In a way she had come to think it was her flowerbed.
From cement to cement the strip is not much more than a foot across.
Walking along it feels slightly precarious to Harry, like treading the
top of a wall.  He walks back as far as the lit kitchen window and
steps onto the cement without the sole of his shoe scraping and on
tiptoe looks in one bright corner.  He sees himself sitting in a high
chair, and a quick strange jealousy comes and passes.  It is his son. 
The boy's little neck gleams like one more clean object in the kitchen
among the cups and plates and chromium knobs and aluminum cake making
receptacles on shelves scalloped with glossy oilcloth.  His mother's
glasses glitter as she leans in from her place at the table with a
spoon of smoking beans at the end of her fat curved arm.  Her face
shows none of the worry she must be feeling about why nobody comes for
the boy and instead is narrowed, her nose a faceted beak, into one
wish: that the boy eat.  Her mouth is focused into white crinkles. They
smooth in a smile; Nelson's lips, hidden from Rabbit's angle, must have
taken the beans.  The others around the table express praise, blurred
syllables from his father, piercing from his sister, something thin
about both voices.  Rabbit, with the intervening glass and the rustle
of blood in his head, can't hear what they say.  His father, fresh from
work, is in an ink-smeared blue shirt and, when his face lapses from
applauding his grandson, looks old: tired and grizzled. His throat a
loose bundle of cords.  The new teeth he got a year ago have changed
his face, collapsed it a fraction of an inch.  Miriam, dolled up in
gold and jet for Friday night, picks at her food indifferently and
offers a spoonful to the kid; the reach of her slender white braceleted
arm across the steaming table rings a barbaric chord into the scene. 
She makes up too much; at nineteen she would be good enough without
green eyelids.  Because she has buck teeth she tries not to smile. 
Nelson's big whorly head dips on its bright neck and his foreshortened
hand, dots of pink, dabbles toward the spoon, wants to take it from
her.  Pop's face lurches into laughter above his plate, and Mim's lips
leap in a grin that cracks her cautious wised-up squint and breaks
through to the little girl Rabbit used to ride on his handlebars, her
streaming hair tickling his eyes as they coasted down the steep Mt. 
Judge streets.  She lets Nelson take her spoon and he drops it.  The
kid cries Peel!  Peel!  : this Rabbit can hear, and understand.  It
means spill.  Pop and Mim smile and make .  remarks but Mom, mouth set,
comes in neatly with her spoon.  Harry's boy is being fed, this home is
happier than his, he glides a pace backward over the cement and re
walks the silent strip of grass.  His acts take on decisive haste.  In
darkness he goes down another block of Jackson.  He cuts up Joseph
Street, runs a block, strides another, and comes within sight of his
car, its grid grinning at him, parked the wrong way on this side of the
street.  He taps his pocket and fear hits him.  He doesn't have the
key.  Everything depends, the whole pure idea, on which way Janice was
sloppy.  Either she forgot to give him the key when be went out or she
never bothered to take it out of the ignition.  He tries to imagine
which is more likely and can't.  He doesn't know her that well.  He
never knows what the hell she'll do.  She doesn't know herself.  Dumb.
The back but not the front of the big Springer house is lit up.  He
moves cautiously in the sweetsmelling shadows under the trees in case
the old lady is waiting inside the darkened living-room to tell him
what she thinks.  He crosses around in front of the car, the 55 Ford
that old man Springer with his little yellow Hitler mustache sold him
for an even thousand in 1957 because the scared bastard was ashamed,
cars being his business he was ashamed of his daughter marrying
somebody who had nothing but a 36 Buick he bought for $125 in the Army
in Texas in 1953.  Made him cough up a thousand he didn't have when the
Buick had just had eighty dollars' worth of work.  That was the kind of
thing.  They deserve everything they get.  He opens the car from the
passenger side, wincing at the pung of the brittle door spring and
quickly ducking his head into the car.  Thank God.  Beneath the knobs
for lights and wipers the octagon of the ignition key tells in
silhouette.  Bless that dope.  Rabbit slithers in, closing the side
door until metal touches metal but not slamming it.  The front of the
stucco Springer house is still unlit.  It reminds him for some reason
of an abandoned icecream stand.  He turns the key through On into Start
and the motor churns and catches.  In his anxiety to be secret he is
delicate on the accelerator and the motor, idle for hours in the air of
an early spring day, is cold, sticks, and stalls.  Rabbit's heart rises
and a taste of straw comes into his throat.  But of course what the
hell if she does come out?  The only thing suspicious is that he
doesn't have the kid and he can say he's on his way to pick him up.
That would have been the logical way to do it anyway.  Nevertheless he
doesn't want to be put to the inconvenience of lying, however
plausibly.  He pulls the hand choke out a fraction, just enough to
pinch his fingertips, and starts the motor again.  He pumps once, and
glances aside to see the Springers' living-room light flash on, and
lets the clutch out, and the Ford bucks away from the curb.  He drives
too fast down Joseph Street, and turns left, ignoring the sign saying
STOP.  He heads down Jackson to where it runs obliquely into Central,
which is also 422 to Philadelphia.  STOP.  He doesn't want to go to
Philadelphia but the road broadens on the edge of town beyond the
electric power station and the only other choice is to go back through
Mt.  Judge around the mountain into the thick of Brewer and the
suppertime traffic.  He doesn't intend ever to see Brewer again, that
flowerpot city.  The highway turns from three-lane to four-lane and
there is no danger of hitting another car; they all run along together
like sticks on a stream.  Rabbit turns on the radio.  After a hum a
beautiful Negress sings, Without a song, the da hay would nehever end,
without a song.  Rabbit wishes for a cigarette to go with the washed
feeling inside and remembers he gave up smoking and feels cleaner
still.  He slumps down and puts one arm up on the back of the seat and
glides down the twilight pike left-handed.  A field of corn the
Negress's voice bending dark and warm like the inside of a cello the
grasses grow the countryside dipping around the road like a continuous
dark bird it makes no mind no how his scalp contracts ecstatically
wihithout a. The smell of parched rubber says the heater has come on
and he turns the little lever to MOD.

Secret Love, Autumn Leaves, and something whose title he missed. Supper
music.  Music to cook by.  His mind nervously shifts away from the
involuntary vision of Janice's meal sizzling in the pan, chops
probably, the grease-tinted water bubbling disconsolately, the unfrozen
peas steaming away their vitamins.  He tries to think of something
pleasant.  He imagines himself about to shoot a long one-hander; but he
feels he's on a cliff, there is an abyss he will fall into when the
ball leaves his hands.  He tries to repicture his mother and sister
feeding his son, but the boy is crying in backward vision, his forehead
red and his mouth stretched wide and his helpless breath hot.  There
must be something: the water from the ice plant running in the gutter,
yellowish, the way it curled on stones and ran in diagonal wrinkles,
waving the pretty threads of slime attached to its edges.  Suddenly
Janice shivers in memory of the other's girl's bed in declining
daylight.  He tries to blot out the sensation with Miriam, Mim on his
handlebars, Mim on a sled in dark snowfall being pulled up Jackson
Street by him, the little kid laughing in her hood, himself the big
brother, the red lights in snowfall marking the trestles the town crew
have used to block off the street for sledding, down, down, the runners
whistling on the dark packed slick, Hold me Harry, the sparks as the
runners hit the cinders spread at the bottom for safety, the scraping
stop like the thump of a great heart in the dark.  Once more Harry,
then we'll go home, I promise Harry, please, oh I love you, little Mim
only seven or so, in her dark hood, the street waxy with snow still
falling.  Poor Janice would probably have the wind up now, on the phone
to her mother or his mother, somebody, wondering why her supper was
getting cold.  So dumb.  Forgive me.  He accelerates.  The growing
complexity of lights threatens him.  He is being drawn into
Philadelphia.  He hates Philadelphia.  Dirtiest city in the world they
live on poisoned water.  He wants to go south, down, down the map into
orange groves and smoking rivers and barefoot women.  It seems simple
enough, drive all night through the dawn through the morning through
the noon park on a beach take off your shoes and fall asleep by the
Gulf of Mexico.  Wake up with the stars above perfectly spaced in
perfect health.  But he is going east, the worst direction, into un
health soot, and stink, a smothering hole where you can't move without
killing somebody.  Yet the highway sucks him on, and a sign says POTTS
TOWN 2. He almost brakes.  But then he thinks.  If he is heading east,
south is on his right.  And then, as if the world were just standing
around waiting to serve his thoughts, a broad road to the right is
advertised, ROUTE 100 WEST CHESTER WILMINGTON.  Route 100 had a fine
ultimate sound.  He doesn't want to go to Wilmington but it's the right
direction.  He's never been to Wilmington.  The Du Ponts own it.  He
wonders what it's like to make it to a Du Pont.  He doesn't drive five
miles before this road begins to feel like a part of the same trap. 
The first road offered him he turns right on.  A keystone marker in the
headlights says 23.  A good number.  The first varsity game be played
in he made 23 points.  A sophomore and a virgin.  Trees overshadow this
narrower road.  A barefoot Du Pont.  Brown legs probably, bitty birdy
breasts.  Beside a swimming pool in France. Something like money in a
naked woman, deep, millions.  You think of millions as being white. 
Sink all the way in softly still lots left. Rich girls frigid? 
Nymphomaniacs?  Must vary.  Just women after all, descended from some
old Indian-cheater luckier than the rest, inherit the same stuff if
they lived in a slum.  Glow all the whiter there, on drab mattresses. 
That wonderful softness they have when they want it. Otherwise just fat
weight.  That wonderful softness, but they want you up and hard on
their little ledge.  The thing is play them until just a touch.  You
can tell: their skin under the fur gets all loose like a puppy's neck. 
Route 23 works west through little tame country towns, Coventryville,
Elverson, Morgantown.  Rabbit likes these.  Square high farmhouses
nuzzle the road.  Soft chalk sides.  In one town a tavern blazes and he
stops at a hardware store opposite with two gasoline pumps outside.  He
knows from the radio it's about seven-thirty, but the hardware store is
still open, shovels and seeders and posthole diggers and axes, metal
painted blue and orange and yellow, in the window, along with some
fishing rods and a string of fielder's gloves. A middle-aged man comes
out in boots, baggy suntans, and two shirts. Yes sir, he says, coming
down on the second word with forced weight, like a lame man stepping.

They're fine.  Let's go.  The man lets the hood slam down and smiles
over at Harry.  That's three-ninety on the gas, young fella : the words
are pronounced in that same heavy cautious crippled way.  Rabbit puts
four ones in his paw.  He disappears into the hardware store; maybe
he's phoning the state cops.  He acts like he knows something, but how
could he?  Rabbit itches to duck into the car and drive off.  To steady
himself he counts the money left in his wallet.  Seventy-three.  Today
was payday.  Fingering so much lettuce strengthens his nerves.
Switching off the lights in the hardware store as he comes, the farmer
comes back with the dime and no map.  Harry cups his hand for the dime
and the man pushes it in with his broad thumb and says, Looked around
inside and the only road map is New York State.  You don't want to go
that way, do you now?

No, Rabbit answers, and walks to his car door.  He feels through the
hairs on the back of his neck the man following him.  He gets into the
car and slams the door and the farmer is right there, the meat of his
face hung in the open door window.  He bends down and nearly sticks his
face in.  His cracked thin lips with a scar tilting toward his nose
move thoughtfully.  He's wearing glasses, a scholar.  The only way to
get somewhere, you know, is to figure out where you're going before you
go there.  Rabbit catches a whiff of whisky.  He says in a level way, I
don't think so.  The lips and spectacles and black hairs poking out of
the man's tear-shaped nostrils show no surprise.  Rabbit pulls out,
going straight.  Everybody who tells you how to act has whisky on their
breath.  He drives to Lancaster and all the way his good airy feeling
inside is spoiled.  That that guy didn't know a thing but was just
half-crocked makes the whole region sinister.  Outside of Churchtown he
passes an Amish buggy in the dark and catches a glimpse of a bearded
man and a woman in black in this horse drawn shadow glaring like
devils. The beard inside the buggy like hairs in a nostril.  He tries
to think of the good life these people lead, of the way they keep clear
of all this phony business, this twentieth-century vitamin racket, but
in his head they stay devils, risking getting killed trotting along
with one dim pink reflector behind, hating Rabbit and his kind, with
their big furry tail lights.  Who they think they were?  He can't shake
them, mentally.  They never appeared in his rear-view mirror.  He
passed them and there was nothing.  It was just that one sideways
glance; the woman's face a hatchet of smoke in the square window.  Tall
coffin lined with hair clopping along to the tune of a dying horse. 
Amish overworked their animals, he knew.  Fanatics.  Hump their women
standing up, out in the fields, wearing clothes, just hoist black
skirts and there it was, nothing underneath.  No underpants.  Fanatics.
Worship manure.  The rich earth seems to cast its darkness upward into
the air.  The farm country is somber at night.  He is grateful when the
lights of Lancaster merge with his dim beams.  He stops at a diner
whose clock says 8:04.  He hadn't intended to eat until he got out of
the state.  He takes a map from the rack by the door and while eating
three hamburgers at the counter studies his position.  He is in
Lancaster, surrounded by funny names, Bird in Hand, Paradise,
Intercourse, Mt.  Airy, Mascot.  They probably didn't seem funny if you
lived in them.  Like Mt.  Judge; you get used.  A town has to be called
something.  Bird in Hand, Paradise: his eyes keep going back to this
dainty lettering on the map.  He has an impulse, amid the oil-filmed
shimmer of this synthetic and desultory diner, to drive there.  Little
plump women, toy dogs in the street, candy houses in lemon sunshine.
But no, his goal is the huge white sun of the south.  And from the map
he's been traveling more west than south; if the dirt digger back there
had had a map he could have gone due south on 10.  Now the only thing
to do is go into the heart of Lancaster and take 222 out and take it
all the way down into Maryland and then catch 1. He remembers reading
in the Saturday Evening Post how 1 goes from Florida to Maine through
the most beautiful scenery in the world.  He asks for a glass of milk
and to go with it a piece of apple pie; the crust is crisp and bubbled
but the filling is watery and lavender in color.  He pays by cracking a
ten and goes out into the parking lot feeling pleased.  The hamburgers
had been fatter and warmer than the ones you get in Brewer, and the
buns had seemed steamed.  It takes him a half-hour to pick his way
through the city.  On 222 he drives south through Refton, Hessdale, New
Providence, and Quarryville, through Mechanics Grove and Unicorn and
then a long stretch so dull and unmarked he doesn't know he's entered
Maryland until he hits Oakwood.  On the radio he hears No Other Arms,
No Other Lips, Stagger Lee, a commercial for Raiko Clear Plastic Seat
Covers, If I Didn't Care by Connie Francis, a commercial for
Radio-Controlled Garage Door Operators, I Ran All the Way Home Just to
Say I'm Sorry, That Old Feeling by Mel Tome, a commercial for Big
Screen Westinghouse TV Set with One-Finger Automatic Tuning,
needle-sharp pictures a nose away from the screen, The Italian Cowboy
Song, Yep, by Duane Eddy, a commercial for Papermate Pens, Almost
Grown, a commercial for Tame Cream Rinse,

Let's Stroll, news (President Eisenhower and Prime Minister Harold
Macmillan began a series of talks in Gettysburg, Tibetans battle
Chinese Communists in Lhasa, the whereabouts of the Dalai Lama,
spiritual ruler of this remote and backward land, are unknown, a
$250,000 trust fund has been left to a Park Avenue maid, Spring
scheduled to arrive tomorrow), sports news (Yanks over Braves in Miami,
somebody tied with somebody in St.  Petersburg Open, scores in a local
basketball tournament), weather (fair and seasonably warm), The Happy
Organ, Turn Me Loose, a commercial for Savings Bank Life Insurance,
Rocksville, P-A (Rabbit loves it), A Picture No Artist Could Paint, a
commercial for New Formula Barbasol Presto-Lather, the daily cleansing
action tends to prevent skin blemishes and emulsifies something, Pink
Shoe Laces by Dody Stevens, a letter about a little boy called Billy
Tessman who was hit by a car and would appreciate cards or letters,
Petit Fleur, Fungo (great), a commercial for Wool-Tex All-Wool Suits,
Fall Out by Henry Mancini, Everybody Likes to Cha Cha Cha, a commercial
for Lord's Grace Table Napkins and the gorgeous Last Supper Tablecloth,
The Beat of My Heart, a commercial for Speed-Shine Wax and Lanolin
Clay, Venus, and then the same news again.  Where is the Dalai Lama?
Shortly after Oakwood he comes to Route 1, which with its hot-dog
stands and Calso signs and roadside taverns aping log cabins is
unexpectedly discouraging.  The further he drives the more he feels
some great confused system, Baltimore now instead of Philadelphia,
reaching for him.  He stops at a gas station for two dollars' worth of
regular.  What he really wants is another map.  He unfolds it standing
by a Coke machine and reads it in the light coming through a window
stained green by stacked cans of liquid wax.  His problem is to get
west and free of Baltimore-Washington, which like a two-headed dog
guards the coastal route to the south.  He doesn't want to go down
along the water anyway; his image is of himself going right down the
middle, right into the broad soft belly of the land, surprising the
dawn cotton fields with his northern plates.  Now he is somewhere here.
Further on, then, a road numbered 23 will go off to his left no, his
right.  That goes up and over and back into Pennsylvania but at this
place, Shawsville, he can take a little narrow blue road without a
number.  Then go down a little and over again on 137.  There is a
ragged curve then that this road makes with 482 and then 31.  Rabbit
can feel himself swinging up and through that curve into the red line
numbered 26 and down that into another numbered 340.  Red, too; he is
really gliding and suddenly sees where he wants to go.  Over on the
left three red roads stream parallel northeast to southwest; Rabbit can
just feel them sliding down through the valleys of the Appalachians.
Get on one of them it would be a chute dumping you into sweet low
cotton land in the morning.  Yes.  Once he gets on that he can shake
all thoughts of the mess behind him.  He gives two dollars for gas to
the attendant, a young but tall colored boy whose limber lazy body
slumping inside his baggy Amoco coveralls Rabbit has a weird impulse to
hug. This far south the air already feels warmer.  Warmth vibrates in
brown and purple arcs between the lights of the service station and the
moon. The clock in the window above the green cans of liquid wax says
9:10. The thin red second hand sweeps the numbers calmly and makes
Rabbit's way seem smooth.  He ducks into the Ford and in that fusty hot
interior starts to murmur, Ev, reebody loves the, cha cha cha.  He
drives bravely at first.  Over blacktop and white top through towns and
fields, past false intersections with siren voices, keeping the map on
the seat beside him, keeping the numbers straight and resisting the
impulse to turn blindly south.  Something animal in him knows he is
going west. The land grows wilder.  The road evades great lakes and
tunnels through pines.  In the top of the windshield the telephone
wires continually whip the stars.  The music on the radio slowly
freezes; the rock and roll for kids cools into old standards and show
tunes and comforting songs from the Forties.  Rabbit pictures married
couples driving home to babysitters after a meal out and a movie.  Then
these melodies turn to ice as real night music takes over, pianos and
vibes erecting clusters in the high brittle octaves and a clarinet
wandering across like a crack on a pond.  Saxes doing the same figure 8
over and over again.  Growing sleepy, Rabbit stops before midnight at a
roadside caf for coffee.  Somehow, though he can't put his finger on
the difference, he is unlike the other customers.  They sense it too,
and look at him with hard eyes, eyes like little metal studs pinned
into the white faces of young men sitting in zippered jackets in booths
three to a girl, the girls with orange hair hanging like seaweed or
loosely bound with gold barrettes like pirate treasure.  At the counter
middle-aged couples in overcoats bunch their faces forward into the
straws of gray ice-cream sodas.  In the bush his entrance induces, the
excessive courtesy the weary woman behind the counter shows him
amplifies his strangeness.  He orders coffee quietly and studies the
rim of the cup to steady the sliding in his stomach.  He had thought,
he had read, that from shore to shore all America was the same.  He
wonders, Is it just these people I'm outside, or is it all America? 
Outside in the sharp air, he flinches when footsteps pound behind him. 
But it is just two lovers, holding hands and in a hurry to reach their
car, their locked hands a starfish leaping through the dark.  Their
license plate says West Virginia.  All the plates do except his.  On
the other side of the road the wooded land dips down so he can look
over the tops of trees at the side of a mountain like a cutout of stiff
paper mounted on a slightly faded blue sheet.  He climbs into his Ford
distastefully, but its stale air is his only haven.  He drives through
Frederick, a discouraging town because an hour back he had thought he
had reached Frederick when it was really Westminster.  He picks up 340.
The road unravels with infuriating slowness, its black wall
wearilessly rising in front of his headlights no matter how they twist.
The tar sucks his tires.  He realizes that the heat on his cheeks is
anger; he has been angry ever since he left that diner full of
mermaids.  So angry his cheeks feel parched inside his mouth and his
nostrils water.  He grinds his foot down as if to squash this snake of
a road, and nearly loses the car on a curve, as the two right wheels
fall captive to the dirt shoulder.  He brings them back but keeps the
speedometer needle leaning to the right.  He turns off the radio; its
music no longer seems a river he is riding down but instead speaks with
the voice of the cities and brushes his head with slippery hands.  Yet
into the silence that results he refuses to let thoughts come.  He
doesn't want to think, he wants to fall asleep and wake up pillowed by
sand.  How stupid, how frigging, frigging stupid it was, not to be
further than this.  At midnight, the night half gone.  The land refuses
to change.  The more he drives the more the region resembles the
country around Mt.  Judge. The same scruff on the embankments, the same
weathered billboards for the same insane products.  At the upper edge
of his headlight beams the naked tree-twigs make the same net.  Indeed
the net seems thicker now. The animal in him swells its protest that he
is going west.  His mind stubbornly resists.  The only way to get
somewhere is to decide where you're going and go.  His plan calls for
him to bear left 28 miles after Frederick and that 28 miles is used up
now and, though his instincts cry out against it, when a broad road
leads off to the left, though it's unmarked, he takes it.  It is
unlikely that the road would be marked, from its thickness on the map. 
But it is a shortcut, he knows.  He remembers that when Marty Tothero
began to coach him he didn't want to shoot fouls underhand but that it
turned out in the end to be the way.  The road is broad and confident
for miles, but there is a sudden patched stretch, and after that it
climbs and narrows. Narrows not so much by plan as naturally, the edges
crumbling in and the woods on either side crowding down.  The road
twists more and more wildly in its struggle to gain height and then
without warning sheds its skin of asphalt and worms on in dirt.  By now
Rabbit knows this is not the road but he is afraid to stop the car to
turn it around.  He has left the last light of a house miles behind. 
When he strays from straddling the mane of weeds, brambles rake his
painted sides. Tree-trunks and low limbs are all his headlights pick
up; the scrabbling shadows spider backward through the web of
wilderness into a black core where he fears his probe of light will
stir some beast or ghost.  He supports speed with prayer, praying that
the road not stop, remembering how on Mt.  Judge even the shaggiest
most forgotten logging lane eventually sloped to the valley.  His ears
itch; his height presses on them.  The prayer's answer is blinding. 
The trees at a far bend leap like flame and a car comes around and
flies at him with its beams tilted high.  Rabbit slithers over into the
ditch and, faceless as death, the bright car rips by at a speed twice
his own.  For more than a minute Rabbit drives through this bastard's
insulting dust.  Yet the good news makes him meek, the news that this
road goes two ways. And shortly he seems to be in a park.  His lights
pick up green little barrels stenciled PLEASE and the trees are thinned
on both sides and in among them picnic tables and pavilions and
outhouses show their straight edges.  The curves of cars show too, and
a few are parked close to the road, their passengers down out of sight.
So the road of horror is a lovers' lane.  In a hundred yards it ends. 
It meets at right angles a smooth broad highway overhung by the dark
cloud of a mountain ridge.  One car zips north.  Another zips south. 
There are no signs.  Rabbit puts the shift in neutral and pulls out the
emergency brake and turns on the roof light and studies his map.  His
hands and shins are trembling.  His brain flutters with fatigue behind
sandy eyelids; the time must be 12:30 or later.  The highway in front
of him is empty.  He has forgotten the numbers of the routes he has
taken and the names of the towns he has passed through.  He remembers
Frederick but can't find it and in time realizes he is searching in a
section due west of Washington where he has never been.  There are so
many red lines and blue lines, long names, little towns, squares and
circles and stars.  He moves his eyes north but the only line he
recognizes is the straight dotted line of the Pennsylvania-Maryland
border.  The Mason-Dixon Line.  The schoolroom in which he learned this
recurs to him, the rooted desk rows, the scarred varnish, the milky
black of the blackboard, the sweet pieces of ass all up and down the
aisles in alphabetical order.  His eyes blankly founder.  Rabbit hears
a clock in his head beat, monstrously slow, the soft ticks as far apart
as the sound of waves on the shore he had wanted to reach.  He burns
his attention through the film fogging his eyes down into the map
again. At once

Frederick pops into sight, but in trying to steady its position he
loses it, and fury makes the bridge of his nose ache.  The names melt
away and he sees the map whole, a net, all those red lines and blue
lines and stars, a net he is somewhere caught in.  He claws at it and
tears it; with a gasp of exasperation he rips away a great triangular
piece and tears the large remnant in half and, more calmly, lays these
three pieces on top of each other and tears them in half, and then
those six pieces and so on until he has a wad he can squeeze in his
hand like a ball.  He rolls down the window and throws the ball out; it
explodes, and the bent scraps like disembodied wings flicker back over
the top of the car.  He cranks up the window.  He blames everything on
that farmer with glasses and two shirts.  Funny how the man sticks in
his throat.  He can't think past him, his smugness, his solidity,
somehow.  He stumbled over him back there and is stumbling still, can't
get him away from his feet, like shoelaces too long or a stiff stick
between his feet; the man mocked, whether out of his mouth or in the
paced motions of his hands or through his hairy ears, somewhere out of
his body mocked the furtive wordless hopes that at moments made the
ground firm for Harry.  Decide where you want to go and then go: it
missed the whole point and yet there is always the chance that, little
as it is, it is everything.  At any rate Rabbit feels if he'd trusted
to instinct he'd be in South Carolina now.  He wishes he had a
cigarette, to help him decide what his instinct is.  He decides to go
to sleep in the car for a few hours.  But a car starts up in the
petting grove behind him and the headlights wheel around and press on
Rabbit's neck.  He stopped his car right in the middle of the road, for
a glance at the map.  Now he must move.  He feels unreasoning fear of
being overtaken; the other headlights swell in the rearview mirror and
fill it like a cup.  He stamps the clutch, puts the shift in first, and
releases the hand brake Hopping onto the highway, he turns
instinctively right, north.  The trip home is easier.  Though he has no
map and hardly any gas, an all-night Mobilgas magically appears near
Hagerstown and green signs begin to point to the Pennsylvania Turnpike.
The music on the radio is soothing now, lyrical and unadvertised, and,
coming first from Harrisburg and then from Philadelphia, makes a beam
he infallibly flies in on.  He has broken through the barrier of
fatigue and come into a calm flat world where nothing matters much. The
last quarter of a basketball game used to carry him into this world;
you ran not as the crowd thought for the sake of the score but for
yourself, in a kind of idleness.  There was you and sometimes the ball
and then the hole, the high perfect hole with its pretty skirt of net. 
It was you, just you and that fringed ring, and sometimes it came down
right to your lips it seemed and sometimes it stayed away, hard and
remote and small.  It seemed silly for the crowd to applaud or groan
over what you had already felt in your fingers or even in your arms as
you braced to shoot or for that matter in your eyes: when he was hot he
could see the separate threads wound into the strings looping the hoop.
Yet at the start of the night when you came out for warm-up and could
see all the town clunkers sitting in the back of bleachers elbowing
each other and the cheerleaders wisecracking with the racier male
teachers, the crowd then seemed right inside you, your liver and lungs
and stomach.  There was one fat guy used to come who'd get on the floor
of Rabbit's stomach and really make it shake.  Hey, Gunner!  Hey,
Showboat, shoot!  Shoot!  Rabbit remembers him fondly now; to that guy
he had been a hero of sorts.  Throughout the early morning the music
keeps coming and the signs keep pointing.  His brain feels like a frail
but alert invalid packed inside among a lot of deep pillows with
messengers bringing him down long corridors all this music and
geographical news.  At the same time he feels abnormally sensitive on
the surface, as if his skin is thinking.  The steering wheel is thin as
a whip in his hands.  As he turns it lightly he can feel the shaft
stiffly pivot, and the differential gears part, and the bearings rotate
in their sealed tunnels of grease.  The phosphorescent winkers at the
side of the road beguile him into thinking of young Du Pont women:
strings of them winding through huge glassy parties, potentially naked
in their sequined sheath gowns.  He wonders why there are so many signs
coming back and so few going down.  Of course he didn't know what he
was going toward going down.  He takes the Brewer turnoff off the Pike
and the road takes him through the town where he first bought gas.  As
he takes the road marked BREWER 16 he can see catty cornered across the
main street the dirt digger pumps and his dark window full of glinting
shovels and fishing rods.  The window looks pleased.  There is just a
touch of light in the air.  The radio's long floe of music is breaking
up in warm-weather reports and farm prices.  He comes into Brewer from
the south, seeing it as a gradual multiplication of houses among the
trees beside the road and then as a treeless waste of industry, shoe
factories and bottling plants and company parking lots and knitting
mills converted to electronics parts and elephantine gas tanks lifting
above trash-filled swampland yet lower than the blue edge of the
mountain from whose crest Brewer was a warm carpet woven around a
single shade of brick.  He crossed the Running Horse Bridge and is
among streets he knows.  He takes Warren Avenue through the south side
of town and comes out on 422 near City Park.  He drives around the
mountain in company with a few hissing trailer trucks.  As he turns
left from Central into Jackson he nearly sideswipes a milk truck idling
yards out from the curb.  He continues up Jackson, past his parents'
house, and turns into Kegerise Alley, and in the clear dawn light he
glides past the old chicken house, past the silent body shop, and parks
the car in front of the Sunshine Athletic Association, a few steps from
the boxed-in entrance, where anyone coming out would have to notice.
Rabbit glances up hopefully at the third-story windows but no light is
showing.  Tothero, if he is in there, is still asleep.  Rabbit settles
himself to sleep.  He takes off his suit coat and lays it over his
chest like a blanket.  But the daylight is growing, and the front seat
is far too short, and the steering wheel crowds his shoulders.  He
doesn't move to the back seat because that would make him vulnerable;
he wants to be able to drive away in a second if he must.  Further, he
doesn't want to sleep so heavily he will miss Tothero when he comes
out.  So there he lies, his long legs doubled up and no place really
for his feet, gazing up with crusty vision across the steering wheel
and through the windshield into the sky's flat fresh blue.  Today is
Saturday, and the sky has that broad bright blunt Saturday quality
Rabbit remembers from boy-hood when the sky of a Saturday morning was
the blank scoreboard of a long game about to begin.  A car goes by up
the alley, and Rabbit closes his eyes, and the darkness vibrates with
the incessant automobile noises of the night past.  He sees again the
woods, the narrow road, the dark grove full of cars each containing a
silent coupling.  He thinks again of his goal, lying down at dawn in
sand by the Gulf of Mexico, and it seems in a way that the gritty seat
of his car is that sand, and the rustling of the waking town the
rustling of the sea.  He must not miss Tothero.  He opens his eyes and
tries to rise from his stiff shroud.  He wonders if he has missed any
time.  The sky is the same.  He becomes anxious about the car windows.
He hoists his chest up on one elbow and checks them all.  The window
above his head is open a crack and he cranks it tight and pushes down
all the lock buttons.  This security relaxes him hopelessly.  He turns
his face into the crack between seat and back.  This twisting pushes
his knees into the tense upright cushion, and annoyance that for the
moment makes him more wakeful.  He wonders where his son slept, what
Janice has done, where his parents and her parents hunted.  Whether the
police know.  He feels the faded night he left behind in this place as
a net of telephone calls and hasty trips, trails of tears and strings
of words, white worried threads shuttled through the night and now
faded but still existent, an invisible net overlaying the steep streets
and in whose center he lies secure in his locked windowed hutch. 
Cotton and gulls in half-light and the way she'd come on the other
girl's bed, never as good on their own.  But there were good things:
Janice so shy about showing her body even in the first weeks of wedding
yet one night coming into the bathroom expecting nothing he found the
mirror clouded with steam and Janice just out of the shower standing
there doped and pleased with a little blue towel lazily and unashamed
her bottom bright pink with hot water the way a women was of two halves
bending over and turning and laughing at his expression whatever it was
and putting her arms up to kiss him, a blush of steam on her body and
the back of her neck slippery.  Rabbit adjusts his position and returns
his mind to its dark socket; the back of her neck slippery, the pit of
her back pliant, both on their knees together, contortions that never
were.  His shin knocks the door handle, the pain becoming oddly mixed
with the knocks of metal on metal down in the body shop.  Work had
begun.  Eight o'clock?  Rabbit writhes and sits up, the covering coat
collapsing to his warm lap, and indeed through the splotched windshield
there is Tothero's figure, walking away down the alley.  He is up
beyond the very old farmhouse; Rabbit jumps from the car, puts on his
coat, and runs after him.  Mr.  Tothero!  Hey Mr.  Tothero!  His voice
sounds flaked and rusty after hours of disuse.  The man turns, looking
more tired than Rabbit had expected.  A short man with a big balding
head, he had played when basketball was still a quick man's game.  He
seems foreshortened: this big head and a massive checkered sports coat
and then stubby legs in blue trousers that are too long, so the crease
buckles and zigzags above the shoes.  As he brakes his run, and walks
the last strides, Rabbit fears he's made a mistake.  But Tothero says
the perfect thing.  Harry, he says, the great Harry Angstrom.  He puts
out his hand for Harry to seize and with the other squeezes the boy's
arm in a clasp of rigor.  It comes back to Rabbit how he always had his
hands on you.  Tothero just stands there holding on and looking at him,
smiling crookedly, the nose bent, one eye wide open and the other
heavy-lidded.  His face has grown more lopsided with the years.  He is
not going bald evenly; brushed strands of gray and pale brown patch his
skull.

I need your advice, Rabbit says, and corrects himself.  What I really
need is a place to sleep.  Tothero is silent before replying.  His
great strength is in these silences; other men hasten to respond
instantly, as if they were always embarrassed, but Tothero has the
disciplinarian's trick of waiting a moment.  As if he considers
everything.  It gives him great weight.  At last he asks, What's
happened to your home?