The Brangwens had lived for generations on the Marsh Farm, in the
meadows where the Erewash twisted sluggishly through alder trees,
separating Derbyshire from Nottinghamshire. Two miles away, a
church-tower stood on a hill, the houses of the little country town
climbing assiduously up to it. Whenever one of the Brangwens in the
fields lifted his head from his work, he saw the church-tower at
Ilkeston in the empty sky. So that as he turned again to the horizontal
land, he was aware of something standing above him and beyond him in
the distance.

There was a look in the eyes of the Brangwens as if they were expecting
something unknown, about which they were eager. They had that air of
readiness for what would come to them, a kind of surety, an expectancy,
the look of an inheritor.

They were fresh, blond, slow-speaking people, revealing themselves
plainly, but slowly, so that one could watch the change in their eyes
from laughter to anger, blue, lit-up laughter, to a hard blue-staring
anger; through all the irresolute stages of the sky when the weather is
changing.

Living on rich land, on their own land, near to a growing town, they
had forgotten what it was to be in straitened circumstances. They had
never become rich, because there were always children, and the
patrimony was divided every time. But always, at the Marsh, there was
ample.

So the Brangwens came and went without fear of necessity, working hard
because of the life that was in them, not for want of the money.
Neither were they thriftless. They were aware of the last halfpenny,
and instinct made them not waste the peeling of their apple, for it
would help to feed the cattle. But heaven and earth was teeming around
them, and how should this cease? They felt the rush of the sap in
spring, they knew the wave which cannot halt, but every year throws
forward the seed to begetting, and, falling back, leaves the young-born
on the earth. They knew the intercourse between heaven and earth,
sunshine drawn into the breast and bowels, the rain sucked up in the
daytime, nakedness that comes under the wind in autumn, showing the
birds' nests no longer worth hiding. Their life and interrelations were
such; feeling the pulse and body of the soil, that opened to their
furrow for the grain, and became smooth and supple after their
ploughing, and clung to their feet with a weight that pulled like
desire, lying hard and unresponsive when the crops were to be shorn
away. The young corn waved and was silken, and the lustre slid along
the limbs of the men who saw it. They took the udder of the cows, the
cows yielded milk and pulse against the hands of the men, the pulse of
the blood of the teats of the cows beat into the pulse of the hands of
the men. They mounted their horses, and held life between the grip of
their knees, they harnessed their horses at the wagon, and, with hand
on the bridle-rings, drew the heaving of the horses after their will.

In autumn the partridges whirred up, birds in flocks blew like spray
across the fallow, rooks appeared on the grey, watery heavens, and flew
cawing into the winter. Then the men sat by the fire in the house where
the women moved about with surety, and the limbs and the body of the
men were impregnated with the day, cattle and earth and vegetation and
the sky, the men sat by the fire and their brains were inert, as their
blood flowed heavy with the accumulation from the living day.

The women were different. On them too was the drowse of blood-intimacy,
calves sucking and hens running together in droves, and young geese
palpitating in the hand while the food was pushed down their throttle.
But the women looked out from the heated, blind intercourse of
farm-life, to the spoken world beyond. They were aware of the lips and
the mind of the world speaking and giving utterance, they heard the
sound in the distance, and they strained to listen.

It was enough for the men, that the earth heaved and opened its furrow
to them, that the wind blew to dry the wet wheat, and set the young
ears of corn wheeling freshly round about; it was enough that they
helped the cow in labour, or ferreted the rats from under the barn, or
broke the back of a rabbit with a sharp knock of the hand. So much
warmth and generating and pain and death did they know in their blood,
earth and sky and beast and green plants, so much exchange and
interchange they had with these, that they lived full and surcharged,
their senses full fed, their faces always turned to the heat of the blood,
staring into the sun, dazed with looking towards the source of generation,
unable to turn round.

But the woman wanted another form of life than this, something that was
not blood-intimacy. Her house faced out from the farm-buildings and
fields, looked out to the road and the village with church and Hall and
the world beyond. She stood to see the far-off world of cities and
governments and the active scope of man, the magic land to her, where
secrets were made known and desires fulfilled. She faced outwards to
where men moved dominant and creative, having turned their back on the
pulsing heat of creation, and with this behind them, were set out to
discover what was beyond, to enlarge their own scope and range and
freedom; whereas the Brangwen men faced inwards to the teeming life of
creation, which poured unresolved into their veins.

Looking out, as she must, from the front of her house towards the
activity of man in the world at large, whilst her husband looked out to
the back at sky and harvest and beast and land, she strained her eyes
to see what man had done in fighting outwards to knowledge, she
strained to hear how he uttered himself in his conquest, her deepest
desire hung on the battle that she heard, far off, being waged on the
edge of the unknown. She also wanted to know, and to be of the fighting
host.

At home, even so near as Cossethay, was the vicar, who spoke the other,
magic language, and had the other, finer bearing, both of which she
could perceive, but could never attain to. The vicar moved in worlds
beyond where her own menfolk existed. Did she not know her own menfolk:
fresh, slow, full-built men, masterful enough, but easy, native to the
earth, lacking outwardness and range of motion. Whereas the vicar, dark
and dry and small beside her husband, had yet a quickness and a range
of being that made Brangwen, in his large geniality, seem dull and
local. She knew her husband. But in the vicar's nature was that which
passed beyond her knowledge. As Brangwen had power over the cattle so
the vicar had power over her husband. What was it in the vicar, that
raised him above the common men as man is raised above the beast? She
craved to know. She craved to achieve this higher being, if not in
herself, then in her children. That which makes a man strong even if he
be little and frail in body, just as any man is little and frail beside
a bull, and yet stronger than the bull, what was it? It was not money
nor power nor position. What power had the vicar over Tom
Brangwen-none. Yet strip them and set them on a desert island, and the
vicar was the master. His soul was master of the other man's. And
why-why? She decided it was a question of knowledge.

The curate was poor enough, and not very efficacious as a man, either,
yet he took rank with those others, the superior. She watched his
children being born, she saw them running as tiny things beside their
mother. And already they were separate from her own children, distinct.
Why were her own children marked below the others? Why should the
curate's children inevitably take precedence over her children, why
should dominance be given them from the start? It was not money, nor
even class. It was education and experience, she decided.

It was this, this education, this higher form of being, that the mother
wished to give to her children, so that they too could live the supreme
life on earth. For her children, at least the children of her heart,
had the complete nature that should take place in equality with the
living, vital people in the land, not be left behind obscure among the
labourers. Why must they remain obscured and stifled all their lives,
why should they suffer from lack of freedom to move? How should they
learn the entry into the finer, more vivid circle of life?

Her imagination was fired by the squire's lady at Shelly Hall, who came
to church at Cossethay with her little children, girls in tidy capes of
beaver fur, and smart little hats, herself like a winter rose, so fair
and delicate. So fair, so fine in mould, so luminous, what was it that
Mrs. Hardy felt which she, Mrs. Brangwen, did not feel? How was Mrs.
Hardy's nature different from that of the common women of Cossethay, in
what was it beyond them? All the women of Cossethay talked eagerly
about Mrs. Hardy, of her husband, her children, her guests, her dress,
of her servants and her housekeeping. The lady of the Hall was the living
dream of their lives, her life was the epic that inspired their lives.
In her they lived imaginatively, and in gossiping of her husband who
drank, of her scandalous brother, of Lord William Bentley her friend,
member of Parliament for the division, they had their own Odyssey enacting
itself, Penelope and Ulysses before them, and Circe and the swine and the
endless web.

So the women of the village were fortunate. They saw themselves in the
lady of the manor, each of them lived her own fulfilment of the life of
Mrs. Hardy. And the Brangwen wife of the Marsh aspired beyond herself,
towards the further life of the finer woman, towards the extended being
she revealed, as a traveller in his self-contained manner reveals
far-off countries present in himself. But why should a knowledge of
far-off countries make a man's life a different thing, finer, bigger?
And why is a man more than the beast and the cattle that serve him? It
is the same thing.

The male part of the poem was filled in by such men as the vicar and
Lord William, lean, eager men with strange movements, men who had
command of the further fields, whose lives ranged over a great extent.
Ah, it was something very desirable to know, this touch of the
wonderful men who had the power of thought and comprehension. The women
of the village might be much fonder of Tom Brangwen, and more at their
ease with him, yet if their lives had been robbed of the vicar, and of
Lord William, the leading shoot would have been cut away from them,
they would have been heavy and uninspired and inclined to hate. So long
as the wonder of the beyond was before them, they could get along,
whatever their lot. And Mrs. Hardy, and the vicar, and Lord William,
these moved in the wonder of the beyond, and were visible to the eyes
of Cossethay in their motion.

About 1840, a canal was constructed across the meadows of the Marsh
Farm, connecting the newly-opened collieries of the Erewash Valley. A
high embankment travelled along the fields to carry the canal, which
passed close to the homestead, and, reaching the road, went over in a
heavy bridge.

So the Marsh was shut off from Ilkeston, and enclosed in the small
valley bed, which ended in a bushy hill and the village spire of
Cossethay.

The Brangwens received a fair sum of money from this trespass across
their land. Then, a short time afterwards, a colliery was sunk on the
other side of the canal, and in a while the Midland Railway came down
the valley at the foot of the Ilkeston hill, and the invasion was
complete. The town grew rapidly, the Brangwens were kept busy producing
supplies, they became richer, they were almost tradesmen.

Still the Marsh remained remote and original, on the old, quiet side of
the canal embankment, in the sunny valley where slow water wound along
in company of stiff alders, and the road went under ash-trees past the
Brangwens' garden gate.

But, looking from the garden gate down the road to the right, there,
through the dark archway of the canal's square aqueduct, was a colliery
spinning away in the near distance, and further, red, crude houses
plastered on the valley in masses, and beyond all, the dim smoking hill
of the town.

The homestead was just on the safe side of civilisation, outside the
gate. The house stood bare from the road, approached by a straight
garden path, along which at spring the daffodils were thick in green
and yellow. At the sides of the house were bushes of lilac and
guelder-rose and privet, entirely hiding the farm buildings behind.

At the back a confusion of sheds spread into the home-close from out of
two or three indistinct yards. The duck-pond lay beyond the furthest
wall, littering its white feathers on the padded earthen banks, blowing
its stray soiled feathers into the grass and the gorse bushes below the
canal embankment, which rose like a high rampart near at hand, so that
occasionally a man's figure passed in silhouette, or a man and a towing
horse traversed the sky.

At first the Brangwens were astonished by all this commotion around
them. The building of a canal across their land made them strangers in
their own place, this raw bank of earth shutting them off disconcerted
them. As they worked in the fields, from beyond the now familiar
embankment came the rhythmic run of the winding engines, startling at
first, but afterwards a narcotic to the brain. Then the shrill whistle
of the trains re-echoed through the heart, with fearsome pleasure,
announcing the far-off come near and imminent.

As they drove home from town, the farmers of the land met the blackened
colliers trooping from the pit-mouth. As they gathered the harvest, the
west wind brought a faint, sulphurous smell of pit-refuse burning. As
they pulled the turnips in November, the sharp
clink-clink-clink-clink-clink of empty trucks shunting on the line,
vibrated in their hearts with the fact of other activity going on
beyond them.

The Alfred Brangwen of this period had married a woman from Heanor, a
daughter of the "Black Horse". She was a slim, pretty, dark woman,
quaint in her speech, whimsical, so that the sharp things she said did
not hurt. She was oddly a thing to herself, rather querulous in her
manner, but intrinsically separate and indifferent, so that her long
lamentable complaints, when she raised her voice against her husband in
particular and against everybody else after him, only made those who
heard her wonder and feel affectionately towards her, even while they
were irritated and impatient with her. She railed long and loud about
her husband, but always with a balanced, easy-flying voice and a quaint
manner of speech that warmed his belly with pride and male triumph
while he scowled with mortification at the things she said.

Consequently Brangwen himself had a humorous puckering at the eyes, a
sort of fat laugh, very quiet and full, and he was spoilt like a lord
of creation. He calmly did as he liked, laughed at their railing,
excused himself in a teasing tone that she loved, followed his natural
inclinations, and sometimes, pricked too near the quick, frightened and
broke her by a deep, tense fury which seemed to fix on him and hold him
for days, and which she would give anything to placate in him. They
were two very separate beings, vitally connected, knowing nothing of
each other, yet living in their separate ways from one root.

There were four sons and two daughters. The eldest boy ran away early
to sea, and did not come back. After this the mother was more the node
and centre of attraction in the home. The second boy, Alfred, whom the
mother admired most, was the most reserved. He was sent to school in
Ilkeston and made some progress. But in spite of his dogged, yearning
effort, he could not get beyond the rudiments of anything, save of
drawing. At this, in which he had some power, he worked, as if it were
his hope. After much grumbling and savage rebellion against everything,
after much trying and shifting about, when his father was incensed
against him and his mother almost despairing, he became a draughtsman
in a lace-factory in Nottingham.

He remained heavy and somewhat uncouth, speaking with broad Derbyshire
accent, adhering with all his tenacity to his work and to his town
position, making good designs, and becoming fairly well-off. But at
drawing, his hand swung naturally in big, bold lines, rather lax, so
that it was cruel for him to pedgill away at the lace designing,
working from the tiny squares of his paper, counting and plotting and
niggling. He did it stubbornly, with anguish, crushing the bowels
within him, adhering to his chosen lot whatever it should cost. And he
came back into life set and rigid, a rare-spoken, almost surly man.

He married the daughter of a chemist, who affected some social
superiority, and he became something of a snob, in his dogged fashion,
with a passion for outward refinement in the household, mad when
anything clumsy or gross occurred. Later, when his three children were
growing up, and he seemed a staid, almost middle-aged man, he turned
after strange women, and became a silent, inscrutable follower of
forbidden pleasure, neglecting his indignant bourgeois wife without a
qualm.

Frank, the third son, refused from the first to have anything to do
with learning. From the first he hung round the slaughter-house which
stood away in the third yard at the back of the farm. The Brangwens
had always killed their own meat, and supplied the neighbourhood. Out
of this grew a regular butcher's business in connection with the farm.

As a child Frank had been drawn by the trickle of dark blood that ran
across the pavement from the slaughter-house to the crew-yard, by the
sight of the man carrying across to the meat-shed a huge side of beef,
with the kidneys showing, embedded in their heavy laps of fat.

He was a handsome lad with soft brown hair and regular features
something like a later Roman youth. He was more easily excitable, more
readily carried away than the rest, weaker in character. At eighteen he
married a little factory girl, a pale, plump, quiet thing with sly eyes
and a wheedling voice, who insinuated herself into him and bore him a
child every year and made a fool of him. When he had taken over the
butchery business, already a growing callousness to it, and a sort of
contempt made him neglectful of it. He drank, and was often to be found
in his public house blathering away as if he knew everything, when in
reality he was a noisy fool.

Of the daughters, Alice, the elder, married a collier and lived for a
time stormily in Ilkeston, before moving away to Yorkshire with her
numerous young family. Effie, the younger, remained at home.

The last child, Tom, was considerably younger than his brothers, so had
belonged rather to the company of his sisters. He was his mother's
favourite. She roused herself to determination, and sent him forcibly
away to a grammar-school in Derby when he was twelve years old. He did
not want to go, and his father would have given way, but Mrs. Brangwen
had set her heart on it. Her slender, pretty, tightly-covered body,
with full skirts, was now the centre of resolution in the house, and
when she had once set upon anything, which was not often, the family
failed before her.

So Tom went to school, an unwilling failure from the first. He believed
his mother was right in decreeing school for him, but he knew she was
only right because she would not acknowledge his constitution. He knew,
with a child's deep, instinctive foreknowledge of what is going to
happen to him, that he would cut a sorry figure at school. But he took
the infliction as inevitable, as if he were guilty of his own nature,
as if his being were wrong, and his mother's conception right. If he
could have been what he liked, he would have been that which his mother
fondly but deludedly hoped he was. He would have been clever, and
capable of becoming a gentleman. It was her aspiration for him,
therefore he knew it as the true aspiration for any boy. But you can't
make a silk purse out of a sow's ear, as he told his mother very early,
with regard to himself; much to her mortification and chagrin.

When he got to school, he made a violent struggle against his physical
inability to study. He sat gripped, making himself pale and ghastly in
his effort to concentrate on the book, to take in what he had to learn.
But it was no good. If he beat down his first repulsion, and got like a
suicide to the stuff, he went very little further. He could not learn
deliberately. His mind simply did not work.

In feeling he was developed, sensitive to the atmosphere around him,
brutal perhaps, but at the same time delicate, very delicate. So he had
a low opinion of himself. He knew his own limitation. He knew that his
brain was a slow hopeless good-for-nothing. So he was humble.

But at the same time his feelings were more discriminating than those
of most of the boys, and he was confused. He was more sensuously
developed, more refined in instinct than they. For their mechanical
stupidity he hated them, and suffered cruel contempt for them. But when
it came to mental things, then he was at a disadvantage. He was at
their mercy. He was a fool. He had not the power to controvert even the
most stupid argument, so that he was forced to admit things he did not
in the least believe. And having admitted them, he did not know whether
he believed them or not; he rather thought he did.

He could not voluntarily control his attention. His mind had no fixed
habits to go by, he had nothing to get hold of, nowhere to start from.
For him there was nothing palpable, nothing known in himself, that he
could apply to learning. He did not know how to begin. Therefore he was
helpless when it came to deliberate understanding or deliberate
learning.

He had an instinct for mathematics, but if this failed him, he was
helpless as an idiot. So that he felt that the ground was never sure
under his feet, he was nowhere. His final downfall was his complete
inability to attend to a question put without suggestion. If he had to
write a formal composition on the Army, he did at last learn to repeat
the few facts he knew: "You can join the army at eighteen. You have to
be over five foot eight." But he had all the time a living conviction
that this was a dodge and that his common-places were beneath contempt.
Then he reddened furiously, felt his bowels sink with shame, scratched
out what he had written, made an agonised effort to think of something
in the real composition style, failed, became sullen with rage and
humiliation, put the pen down and would have been torn to pieces rather
than attempt to write another word.

He soon got used to the Grammar School, and the Grammar School got used
to him, setting him down as a hopeless duffer at learning, but
respecting him for a generous, honest nature. Only one narrow,
domineering fellow, the Latin master, bullied him and made the blue
eyes mad with shame and rage. There was a horrid scene, when the boy
laid open the master's head with a slate, and then things went on as
before. The teacher got little sympathy. But Brangwen winced and could
not bear to think of the deed, not even long after, when he was a grown
man.

He was glad to leave school. It had not been unpleasant, he had enjoyed
the companionship of the other youths, or had thought he enjoyed it,
the time had passed very quickly, in endless activity. But he knew all
the time that he was in an ignominious position, in this place of
learning. He was aware of failure all the while, of incapacity. But he
was too healthy and sanguine to be wretched, he was too much alive. Yet
his soul was wretched almost to hopelessness.

He had loved one warm, clever boy who was frail in body, a consumptive
type. The two had had an almost classic friendship, David and Jonathan,
wherein Brangwen was the Jonathan, the server. But he had never felt
equal with his friend, because the other's mind outpaced his, and left
him ashamed, far in the rear. So the two boys went at once apart on
leaving school. But Brangwen always remembered his friend that had
been, kept him as a sort of light, a fine experience to remember.

When he was seventeen, his father fell from a stack and broke his neck.
Then the mother and son and daughter lived on at the farm, interrupted
by occasional loud-mouthed lamenting, jealous-spirited visitations from
the butcher Frank, who had a grievance against the world, which he felt
was always giving him less than his dues. Frank was particularly
against the young Tom, whom he called a mardy baby, and Tom returned
the hatred violently, his face growing red and his blue eyes staring.
Effie sided with Tom against Frank. But when Alfred came, from
Nottingham, heavy jowled and lowering, speaking very little,
but treating those at home with some contempt, Effie and the mother
sided with him and put Tom into the shade. It irritated the youth that
his elder brother should be made something of a hero by the women, just
because he didn't live at home and was a lace-designer and almost a
gentleman. But Alfred was something of a Prometheus Bound, so the women
loved him. Tom came later to understand his brother better.

As youngest son, Tom felt some importance when the care of the farm
devolved on to him. He was only eighteen, but he was quite capable of
doing everything his father had done. And of course, his mother
remained as centre to the house.

The young man grew up very fresh and alert, with zest for every moment
of life. He worked and rode and drove to market, he went out with
companions and got tipsy occasionally and played skittles and went to
the little travelling theatres. Once, when he was drunk at a public
house, he went upstairs with a prostitute who seduced him. He was then
nineteen.

The thing was something of a shock to him. In the close intimacy of the
farm kitchen, the woman occupied the supreme position. The men deferred
to her in the house, on all household points, on all points of morality
and behaviour. The woman was the symbol for that further life which
comprised religion and love and morality. The men placed in her hands
their own conscience, they said to her "Be my conscience-keeper, be
the angel at the doorway guarding my outgoing and my incoming." And the
woman fulfilled her trust, the men rested implicitly in her, receiving
her praise or her blame with pleasure or with anger, rebelling and
storming, but never for a moment really escaping in their own souls
from her prerogative. They depended on her for their stability. Without
her, they would have felt like straws in the wind, to be blown hither
and thither at random. She was the anchor and the security, she was the
restraining hand of God, at times highly to be execrated.

Now when Tom Brangwen, at nineteen, a youth fresh like a plant, rooted
in his mother and his sister, found that he had lain with a prostitute
woman in a common public house, he was very much startled. For him
there was until that time only one kind of woman-his mother and sister.

But now? He did not know what to feel. There was a slight wonder, a
pang of anger, of disappointment, a first taste of ash and of cold fear
lest this was all that would happen, lest his relations with woman were
going to be no more than this nothingness; there was a slight sense of
shame before the prostitute, fear that she would despise him for his
inefficiency; there was a cold distaste for her, and a fear of her;
there was a moment of paralysed horror when he felt he might have taken
a disease from her; and upon all this startled tumult of emotion, was
laid the steadying hand of common sense, which said it did not matter
very much, so long as he had no disease. He soon recovered balance, and
really it did not matter so very much.

But it had shocked him, and put a mistrust into his heart, and
emphasised his fear of what was within himself. He was, however, in a
few days going about again in his own careless, happy-go-lucky fashion,
his blue eyes just as clear and honest as ever, his face just as fresh,
his appetite just as keen.

Or apparently so. He had, in fact, lost some of his buoyant confidence,
and doubt hindered his outgoing.

For some time after this, he was quieter, more conscious when he drank,
more backward from companionship. The disillusion of his first carnal
contact with woman, strengthened by his innate desire to find in a
woman the embodiment of all his inarticulate, powerful religious
impulses, put a bit in his mouth. He had something to lose which he was
afraid of losing, which he was not sure even of possessing. This first
affair did not matter much: but the business of love was, at the bottom
of his soul, the most serious and terrifying of all to him.

He was tormented now with sex desire, his imagination reverted always
to lustful scenes. But what really prevented his returning to a loose
woman, over and above the natural squeamishness, was the recollection
of the paucity of the last experience. It had been so nothing, so
dribbling and functional, that he was ashamed to expose himself to the
risk of a repetition of it.

He made a strong, instinctive fight to retain his native cheerfulness
unimpaired. He had naturally a plentiful stream of life and humour, a
sense of sufficiency and exuberance, giving ease. But now it tended to
cause tension. A strained light came into his eyes, he had a slight
knitting of the brows. His boisterous humour gave place to lowering
silences, and days passed by in a sort of suspense.

He did not know there was any difference in him, exactly; for the most
part he was filled with slow anger and resentment. But he knew he was
always thinking of women, or a woman, day in, day out, and that
infuriated him. He could not get free: and he was ashamed. He had one
or two sweethearts, starting with them in the hope of speedy
development. But when he had a nice girl, he found that he was
incapable of pushing the desired development. The very presence of the
girl beside him made it impossible. He could not think of her like
that, he could not think of her actual nakedness. She was a girl and he
liked her, and dreaded violently even the thought of uncovering her. He
knew that, in these last issues of nakedness, he did not exist to her
nor she to him. Again, if he had a loose girl, and things began to
develop, she offended him so deeply all the time, that he never knew
whether he was going to get away from her as quickly as possible, or
whether he were going to take her out of inflamed necessity. Again he
learnt his lesson: if he took her it was a paucity which he was forced
to despise. He did not despise himself nor the girl. But he despised
the net result in him of the experience-he despised it deeply and
bitterly.

Then, when he was twenty-three, his mother died, and he was left at
home with Effie. His mother's death was another blow out of the dark.
He could not understand it, he knew it was no good his trying. One had
to submit to these unforeseen blows that come unawares and leave a
bruise that remains and hurts whenever it is touched. He began to be
afraid of all that which was up against him. He had loved his mother.

After this, Effie and he quarrelled fiercely. They meant a very great
deal to each other, but they were both under a strange, unnatural
tension. He stayed out of the house as much as possible. He got a
special corner for himself at the "Red Lion" at Cossethay, and became a
usual figure by the fire, a fresh, fair young fellow with heavy limbs
and head held back, mostly silent, though alert and attentive, very
hearty in his greeting of everybody he knew, shy of strangers. He
teased all the women, who liked him extremely, and he was very
attentive to the talk of the men, very respectful.

To drink made him quickly flush very red in the face, and brought out
the look of self-consciousness and unsureness, almost bewilderment, in
his blue eyes. When he came home in this state of tipsy confusion his
sister hated him and abused him, and he went off his head, like a mad
bull with rage.

He had still another turn with a light-o'-love. One Whitsuntide he went
a jaunt with two other young fellows, on horseback, to Matlock and
thence to Bakewell. Matlock was at that time just becoming a famous
beauty-spot, visited from Manchester and from the Staffordshire towns.
In the hotel where the young men took lunch, were two girls, and the
parties struck up a friendship.

The Miss who made up to Tom Brangwen, then twenty-four years old, was a
handsome, reckless girl neglected for an afternoon by the man who had
brought her out. She saw Brangwen and liked him, as all women did, for
his warmth and his generous nature, and for the innate delicacy in him.
But she saw he was one who would have to be brought to the scratch.
However, she was roused and unsatisfied and made mischievous, so she
dared anything. It would be an easy interlude, restoring her pride.

She was a handsome girl with a bosom, and dark hair and blue eyes, a
girl full of easy laughter, flushed from the sun, inclined to wipe her
laughing face in a very natural and taking manner.

Brangwen was in a state of wonder. He treated her with his chaffing
deference, roused, but very unsure of himself, afraid to death of being
too forward, ashamed lest he might be thought backward, mad with
desire yet restrained by instinctive regard for women from making any
definite approach, feeling all the while that his attitude was
ridiculous, and flushing deep with confusion. She, however, became hard
and daring as he became confused, it amused her to see him come on.

